Story highlights Joshua Spivak: The power of a VP is not just in the permanent role

Pence's tie-breaking on DeVos is only the beginning, he writes

Joshua Spivak is a senior fellow at the Hugh L. Carey Institute for Government Reform at Wagner College in New York. He blogs at The Recall Elections Blog. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely his.

(CNN) The early days of the Trump administration have already seen reports of internal skirmishes among his team of advisers. Cabinet members have been left in the dark on major policy changes, and the early stories suggest that his former campaign CEO, Steve Bannon, has established a dominant position, with the inaugural address and many other actions aligning with Bannon's previous statements.

Joshua Spivak

While Bannon's success in the campaign has earned him a key role in the White House, Trump is well-known for quickly switching advisers, looking for the hot hand -- he went through three campaign managers last year . With that in mind, it may be that anyone who has Trump's ear may only keep it for a short time before they are ignored or cast aside.

Therefore, it pays to consider a key fact about his team when looking at which adviser may have the longest and impact: Save one, he can fire every of them, at any time. And that one unfireable official is Vice President Mike Pence.

The power of a VP is not just in his or her permanent role. A split with the VP would be politically embarrassing for any president, as it would show a significant divide in the party and the leadership. For Donald Trump, who has not established himself as a party unifier, it would especially be damaging. Pence is a well-liked former member of the House Republican leadership team, as well as a former governor. Any separation between Trump and Pence could reverberate against Trump in Congress.

Vice presidents also have an independent role, even if it is frequently maligned -- they preside over the Senate, which may seem to be a formality, but in the right hands it could be more than that. The VP also breaks tie votes in the Senate, and with the chamber closely divided, Pence is likely to have to use that power.Story highlights Michael Flynn's resignation is another moment of vulnerability for the new president, whose praise for Putin's Russia has put him at odds with the GOP majority on Capitol Hill, writes Julian Zelizer

Zelizer says it could fuel investigations of the role of Russia in the election

(CNN) Michael T. Flynn's resignation is the second major blow to the Trump administration within the span of a week.

After the courts stopped the President's executive order halting admission of refugees, his national security adviser is forced to step down amid revelations of his discussions with Russian officials following the election. The resignation comes in the wake of mixed signals from the White House about what would happen to Flynn

It is not a total surprise that Flynn is the first major member of the administration to fall from power. He has always been one of the most controversial figures in Trump's inner circle. A national security adviser whose views were seen as far outside the mainstream, Flynn bought into conspiracy theories and made anti-Islamic statements.

When he joined the chant of "lock her up" against Hillary Clinton at the Republican National Convention he made it clear that this military official had turned into a rabid partisan attack dog. Many national security experts shuddered to think that Flynn, with his outlandish views, would be the last person in the room when President Trump was making decisions about war and peace.

Now that he is gone the question is whether this turns into something bigger. The problem with Flynn was not simply his own actions but his part in a broader story that has been nagging Trump since the campaign -- why is he so sympathetic to Russia and what kinds of connections have existed, if any, between his inner circle and a foreign government that aggressively intervened in the 2016 election.

Read MorePresident Trump won the rights to his name's trademark in China after ten years of legal battles. Ethics experts are worried about potential constitutional and ethics violations. CNN's Brian Todd reports.President Trump devoted much of Thursday's press conference, which he called to announce a new nominee for secretary of labor, to attacking the media. He criticized the press in general and had this exchange with CNN's senior White House correspondent, Jim Acosta.

DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: Jim?

JIM ACOSTA, CNN SENIOR WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: Mr. President, thank you very much. And just for the record, we don't hate you. I don't hate you.

TRUMP: OK.

ACOSTA: ... pass that along.

TRUMP: Ask Jeff Zucker how he got his job.

ACOSTA: If I may follow up on some of the questions that have taken place so far here, sir, and I don't know which microphone to hold here. I've got three microphones.

TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE) people, and your ratings aren't as good as some of the other people that are waiting (ph).

ACOSTA: They're pretty good right now, actually, Mr. President.

TRUMP: Go ahead, Jim.

ACOSTA: If I may ask, sir, you said earlier that WikiLeaks was revealing information about the Hillary Clinton campaign during the election cycle. You welcomed that at one campaign rally. You said you loved WikiLeaks. At another campaign press conference, you called on the Russians to find the missing 30,000 e-mails.

I'm wondering, sir, if you --

TRUMP: She's actually missing 33,000 and then it got extended with a whole --

ACOSTA: Maybe my numbers are off a little bit too.

TRUMP: No, no, but I did say 30, but it was actually higher than that.

ACOSTA: If I may ask you, sir, it sounds as though you do not have much credibility here when it comes to leaking if that is something that you encouraged during the campaign.

TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE). Ready?

ACOSTA: If I may ask you that --

TRUMP: No, no, but let me do one at a time. Do you mind?

ACOSTA: If I may ask a follow-up. Yes, sir.

TRUMP: So in one case, you're talking about highly classified information. In the other case, you're talking about John Podesta saying bad things about the boss. I will say this. If John Podesta said this about me, and he was working for me, I would have fired him so fast your head would have spun. He said terrible things about her. But it wasn't classified information. But in one case you're talking about classified.

Regardless, if you look at the RNC, we had a very strong -- at my suggestion and I give Reince great credit for this -- at my suggestion, because I know something about this world, I said I want a very strong defensive mechanism. I don't want to be hacked. And we did that. And you have seen that they tried to hack us and they failed. The DNC did not do that. And if they did it, they could not have been hacked. But they were and terrible things came in.

And, you know, the only that I think is unfair is some of the things, they were -- when I heard some of those things, I picked up the papers the next morning, I said, oh this is going to be front page. It wasn't even in the papers.

Again, if I had that happen to me, it would be the biggest story in the history of publishing or the head of newspapers. I would have been the headline in every newspaper. I mean, think of it. They gave her the questions to a debate and she should have reported herself. Why didn't Hillary Clinton announce that I'm sorry, but I have been given the questions to a debate or a town hall, and I feel that it's inappropriate, and I want to turn in CNN for not doing a good job.

ACOSTA: And if I may follow up that, just something that Jonathan Karl was asking you about. You said that the leaks are real but the news is fake. I guess I don't understand. It seems that there's a disconnect there. If the information coming from those leaks is real, then how can the stories be fake?

TRUMP: The reporting is fake.

ACOSTA: And if I may ask -- I just want to ask --

TRUMP: Jim, you know what it is? Here's the thing. The public isn't -- you know, they read newspapers. They see television. They watch. They don't know if it's true or false because they're not involved. I'm involved. I've been involved with this stuff all my life. But I'm involved, so I know when you're telling the truth or when you're not. I just see many, many untruthful things.

And I'll tell you what else I see. I see tone. You know, the word tone. The tone is such hatred. I'm really not a bad person, by the way. No, but the tone is such -- I do get good ratings; you have to admit that. The tone is such hatred. I watched this morning a couple of the networks, and I have to say, "Fox & Friends" in the morning, they're very honorable people. They're very -- not because they're good, because they hit me also when I do something wrong. But they have the most honest morning show. That's all I can say. It's the most honest.

But the tone, Jim. If you look -- the hatred. I mean, sometimes somebody gets -- well, you look at your show that goes on at 10:00 in the evening. You just take a look at that show. That is a constant hit. The panel is almost always exclusive anti-Trump. The good news is he doesn't have good ratings, but the panel is almost exclusive anti-Trump. And the hatred and venom coming from his mouth. The hatred coming from other people on your network.

Now I will say this, I watch it. I see it. I am amazed by it. And I just think you'd be a lot better off -- I honestly do. The public gets it, you know. Look, when I go to rallies, they turn around, they start screaming at CNN. They want to throw their placards at CNN, you know.

I think you'd do much better by being different. But you just take a look. Take a look at some of your shows in the morning and the evening. If a guest comes out and says something positive about me, it's brutal. Now they'll take this news conference -- I'm actually having a very good time, OK? But they'll take this news conference -- don't forget, that's the way I won. Remember, I used to give you a news conference every time I made a speech, which was like every day. OK? No, that's how I won! I won with news conference and probably speeches. I certainly didn't win by people listening to you people. That's for sure.

But I'm having a good time. Tomorrow they'll say Donald Trump rants and raves at the press. I'm not ranting and raving; I'm just telling you. You know, you're dishonest people. But -- but I'm not ranting and raving. I love this. I'm having a good time doing it. But tomorrow the headlines are going to be Donald trump rants and raves. I'm not ranting and raving.

Go ahead.

ACOSTA: If I may just one more follow-up.

TRUMP: Should I let him have a little more? What do you think, Peter?

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Peter, should I have -- let him have a little bit more --

ACOSTA: Just because of this --

TRUMP: Sit down. Sit down. (INAUDIBLE). We'll get it.

ACOSTA: Just because the attack of fake news and attacking our network, I just want to ask you, sir --

TRUMP: I'm changing it from fake news, though.

ACOSTA: Doesn't that undermine --

TRUMP: Very fake news.

ACOSTA: But aren't you --

(LAUGHTER)

TRUMP: Go ahead.

ACOSTA: Real news, Mr. President.

TRUMP: And you're not related to our new --

ACOSTA: I am not related, sir. I do like the sound of Secretary Acosta, I must say.

TRUMP: You know, I looked at that name. I said wait a minute. Is there any relation there, Alex Acosta?

ACOSTA: I'm sure you checked that out, sir.

TRUMP: No, I checked it. I said -- they said, no, sir. I said do me a favor, go back and check the family tree.

ACOSTA: Aren't you concerned, sir, that you are undermining the people's faith in the First Amendment, freedom of the press, the press in country, when you call stories you don't like fake news? Why not just say it's a story I don't like?

TRUMP: I do that.

ACOSTA: When you call it fake news, you're undermining --

TRUMP: No, I do that.

ACOSTA: -- confidence in our news media.

TRUMP: No, no. I do that.

ACOSTA: Isn't that important?

TRUMP: I understand what you're -- and you're right about that except this.

See, I know when I should get good and when I should get bad. Sometimes they'll say, wow, that's going to be a great story. And I'll get killed. I know what's good and bad. I'd be a pretty good reporter. Not as good as you.

But I know what's good. I know what's bad. And when they change it and make it really bad, something that should be positive -- sometimes that should be positive, they'll make OK. They'll even make it negative. So I understand it. So -- because I'm there. I know what was said, I know who was saying it. I'm there. So it's very important to me.

Look, I want to see an honest press. And I started off today by saying that it's so important to the public to get an honest press. The press -- the public doesn't believe you people anymore. Now maybe I had something to do with that. I don't know. But they don't believe you. If you were straight and really told it like it is, as Howard Cosell used to say, right? Of course, he had some questions also. But if you were straight, I would be your biggest booster. I would be your biggest fan in the world, including bad stories about me.

But if you go -- as an example, you're CNN, I mean, it's story after story after story is bad. I won. I won. And the other thing, chaos. There's zero chaos. We are running -- this is a fine-tuned machine. And Reince happens to be doing a good job, but half of his job is putting out lies by the press. You know, I said to him yesterday, this whole Russia scam that you guys are building so that you don't talk about the real subject, which is illegal leaks. But I watched him yesterday working so hard to try and get that story proper. And I'm saying here's my chief of staff, a really good guy, did a phenomenal job at RNC. I mean, won the election, right? Won the presidency. We got some senators, we got some -- all over the country, you take a look. He's done a great job.

And I said to myself, you know -- and I said somebody to that was in RNC (ph), you take a look at Reince. He's working so hard just putting out fires that are fake fires. I mean, they're fake. They're not true. And isn't that a shame, because he'd rather be working on health care. He'd rather be working on tax reform, Jim. I mean that.

I would be your biggest fan in the world if you treated me right. Now I sort of understand there's a certain bias maybe by Jeff or somebody, you know, for whatever reason. But -- and I understand that, but you've got to be at least a little bit fair. And that's why the public sees it. They see it. They see it's not fair. You take a look at some of your shows and you see the bias and the hatred. And the public is smart; they understand it.

OK, yeah, go ahead. Go ahead.Frida Ghitis is a world affairs columnist for The Miami Herald and World Politics Review, and a former CNN producer and correspondent. The views expressed in this commentary are her own.

(CNN) New reports from the Washington Post and the New York Times , citing interviews with multiple current and former senior government officials, directly contradict statements by President Trump's national security adviser, Gen. Michael Flynn, and others in the administration, including Vice President Mike Pence, about what exactly transpired during conversations between Flynn and Russian Ambassador Sergei Kislyak as the administrations made their transition.

Flynn and others claimed the phone calls dealt only with arrangements for a call between Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin. Last month Pence went on CBS's Face the Nation and repeated that story.

But in light of the new revelations, senior White House officials have started walking back Pence's assertions, telling CNN that the vice president only knew what Flynn told him and didn't know that Flynn had discussed sanctions and acknowledging that he believes, "it's a problem." Pence, sources said, is trying to "get to the bottom of it."

Perhaps Flynn should have planned his answer better, considering he has a background in intelligence. It turns out the calls were not just monitored, they were recorded and transcribed. Federal officials told the Times that they read the transcript and Flynn did discuss lifting sanctions. Flynn appears to have lied and may have lied to Pence, who repeated it. Now Flynn is backtracking on his version of events, saying he cannot rule out having spoken about sanctions in his talk with the Russian ambassador, according to an aide to Flynn.

As the evidence against Flynn mounts, entangling others officials up to the vice president, it seems likely that the Trump administration will throw him overboard. But sacrificing Flynn will not remove the cloud of suspicion hanging over the Trump administration and Russia.

Even before America's 17 intelligence agencies concluded that Putin had ordered Russian intelligence to launch a campaign to influence the American election and help Trump win; even before we learned about a secret dossier put together by a respected former British intelligence agent claiming (without confirmation) the Russians had compromising information on Trump -- long before that, Trump's statements and his campaigns actions regarding Russia ranged from startling to shocking.

He started with high praise of Putin in 2015, followed by stunning suggestions that he might recognize Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and lift sanctions imposed by the United States and its allies after Russia invaded neighboring Ukraine, annexed Crimea and sent Russian troops to fight alongside separatists in Ukraine's Donbas region.

Then Trump campaign officials scrubbed the Republican platform at the convention, removing criticism of Russia and statements of support for Ukrainian independence that had been uncontroversial before Trump's candidacy.

JUST WATCHED McCain: Putin is a murderer and thug Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH McCain: Putin is a murderer and thug 00:46

Trump is not the first president to want to improve relations with Russia, but he is the first to suggest doing it by adjusting American policy to suit Russian interests. And he is the first to offer effusive praise of an autocratic ruler (whose critics frequently turn up dead ) by smearing his own country.

As the media and the public try to keep up with an incessant barrage of lies, controversies, foreign policy missteps, and ethical violations, the Trump administration may hope that the Russia question will go away. But few issues are more important.

The lingering questions is whether this administration colluded with the Kremlin in its campaign to interfere with the US election, and whether Trump's decisions on Russia are guided by anything other than what he perceives as America's best interests.

Moscow's recent arrests of the Kremlin's own cyber-spies , possibly in connection with the US election, and the death of a top former KGB/FSB official add mystery to the case.

The President could go a long way in lifting suspicions if he released his tax returns, as every president since Richard Nixon has done, but he won't do that. Why? His argument, that IRS audits prevent it, are plainly false . We don't even know if he is being audited

With government officials, even inside the White House, leaking information with extraordinary frequency, and with news organizations bolstering their operations, we are learning a bit more every day. The telephone calls, for example, were discovered as part of a larger US investigation into Russian activities in the US, sources told CNN.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

Americans can only hope that law enforcement and intelligence agencies follow the trail wherever it may lead. After all, we saw the FBI's involvement in the last election , and we have also seen how willing Trump is to try to intimidate civil servants

Committees in both houses of Congress are launching investigations into Russian interference in the election, but it is unclear how far most Republicans will be willing to dig when it comes to exploring possible coordination between the Trump campaign and the Kremlin.

The question of Trump and Russia is so sensitive, so consequential, that Americans should demand that a select bipartisan panel of Congress look into the issue. Without a credible investigation, doubts about Russia policy will persist as long as Trump is President.CNN's Manu Raju reports on congressional reaction to President Donald Trump's news conference where he introduced his new labor secretary nominee and took questions from the media.Story highlights Ben Mallicote: Liberals are too quick to vilify all Trump supporters

Over the next four years, liberals should try to appeal to the majority of Trump voters through reason and decency

Ben Mallicote is an attorney and an alumnus of the University of Tennessee. He writes about faith, politics, and where the two intersect at www.benmallicote.com. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

(CNN) We are too quick to vilify those on the opposite side of the political aisle. I am firmly opposed to Donald Trump, but because of where I live, I know a lot of good and decent people who voted for him. If I feel the urge to disparage Trump supporters as a group, I have to reconcile that urge with what I know about the Trump voters with whom I work, eat and pray.

Ben Mallicote

There are unquestionably people who voted for Trump for ugly reasons, and those folks are probably beyond persuasion (at least by me), but I've decided I'm going to spend the next four years trying to persuade the good and decent people; to appeal to their reason and the "better angels of their nature."

Persuading them means addressing the motivations they've expressed, not the motivations we might ascribe to them based on the worst and loudest people on their side. That's what I tried to do with a piece I posted last week on Facebook, and later on my website . It ended up getting a lot of attention on the internet, and a version of it is reprinted below.

Surprisingly, the most common criticism I've gotten from the piece has not been from those on the right saying I'm a "libtard snowflake," but from those on the left who think I should have said, "You voted for Trump because you're a fascist," or the like. While it's surely true of some Trump voters, it's grossly unfair as a blanket criticism of all Trump voters. Such hot language rightfully alienates decent people, and cuts off any opportunity we might have had to change their minds.

JUST WATCHED Women Trump voters praise the President Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Women Trump voters praise the President 03:29

Contrary to the social media headlines, we shouldn't aim to DESTROY or EVISCERATE or ANNIHILATE the other side; we must persuade them to consider a different perspective. That's not easy, but it's necessary.

Read MoreWhite, Working-Class and Worried is a CNN partnership with the Kaiser Family Foundation - an extensive survey of white, working-class Americans and voters, who form a backbone of the support for Donald Trump. Watch Anderson Cooper 360 and CNN.com for reports throughout the week.

Welch, West Virginia (CNN) Each morning for the last 65 years, 93-year-old Ed Shepard has walked to work to open up the Union 76 service station, here in rolling hills of West Virginia coal country.

When he looks out his window, he can see a sweeping mural that shows what life in Welch used to be like. A United Cigars shop on one side of the street, a Western Union sign on the other. Lines of cars stretch into the distance. Even Shepard himself -- who is as much a fixture of Welch as any of its buildings -- is in the mural, a blue cap perched on his head.

"There wasn't ten square feet in this town that didn't have a successful business in it, a business of every kind," Shepard said in an interview. "No matter what you wanted or needed, you could buy it in Welch."

Those were better days.

Now it's a place, people who live here say, that politicians use as a convenient photo op and that the federal government has left behind, a sentiment common among white working class voters. 56% of non-college educated whites say the government in Washington does not represent them, according to a new poll conducted by CNN and the Kaiser Family Foundation. And two-thirds say they are dissatisfied with the influence people like them have on politics.

Locals referred to the once-bustling Welch as "Little New York," but now the town and the county around it are slowly slipping away. The storefronts are empty. The buildings and houses here are now crumbling with decay. Shepard used to take checks to the bank each Monday -- sometimes $1,000, sometimes $1,500. He hasn't had to do that in four or five years he said, because he hasn't had one customer in that long.

"It's depressing to watch the population disappear, the businesses disappear and the activity stop. Back in the 50s, 60s and 70s, it was hard to walk up the sidewalk because there was so many people. Now you walk up the sidewalk and there's nobody." -- Ed Shepard, 93.

"It's depressing to watch the population disappear, the business disappear and the activity to stop," he said. "Back in the 50s, 60s, 70s, it'd be hard to walk up the sidewalk because there was so many people. Now you walk up the sidewalk and there's nobody."

McDowell County's population is just 19,835 down from 100,000 in the 1950s. That decline is expected to continue. West Virginia University economists estimate that McDowell will continue to lose residents at a rate of 1% each year.

Some, particularly in rural areas like McDowell County, say the government's at fault. Rural working class whites are more likely to blame the federal government for their economic problems than their urban counterparts. Seven in ten say the federal government deserves all or most of the blame for the economic problems facing the working class, in the CNN Kaiser survey, compared with half of urban working class whites. That could explain the appeal of a candidate who is not only intent on upsetting the political system, but has at times seemed bent on breaking it down to start over again.

On this winding drive through the hilly roads of Appalachia, there are few signs signaling support for Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump, but Trump is expected to do well here. West Virginia hasn't voted for a Democrat since Bill Clinton's second term. Much has changed in the last 20 years and now Clinton is seen as squarely at odds with the coal industry, which is the bedrock of Welch and the surrounding county.

No matter who wins in November, some residents of West Virginia coal country don't believe anything will change their lives. They have come to accept, as Gary Hall, a 55-year-old Trump supporter put it, "that next year is going to be worse than the last year" no matter who is president.

"When we have a natural disaster in the country, everybody shows up. We're the same as a natural disaster without the effects, without the storm, or without the flood. ... Hopefully we can get it turned around and hopefully we'll get some attention from Washington." -- Cecil Patterson, 51 (left in photo)

Hall said he felt alienated from the political process, but rejected the idea that he and other whites without college degrees were angry and flocking to Trump as a result. The CNN/Kaiser foundation survey suggests that's the case, too. Just 19% of working class white voters described themselves as angry about how things are going in their own lives.

"We're conditioned that there's really nothing you can do about it. The only thing outrage and protesting and stuff does is cause bad feelings," he said. "People are just resigned to have what they have. The ones that want to leave, the ones that can leave and want to leave leave. Everybody else just stays here."

Rural working class white voters like Hall are more likely to say America's best days are behind us and that their children will be worse off than they are today. In the CNN/Kaiser survey, 58% of rural working class whites say America's best days have come and gone and 57% say their children will be worse off compared with less than half of urban working class whites who say the same.

West Virginia is one of the nation's largest coal-producing states and McDowell County used to produce more coal than any county here. But there's been a steep downturn in coal jobs across the state due to competition with cheaper natural gas, tougher environmental rules and mechanization, and this county has seen the worst of it.

"We don't have another option," said Cecil Patterson, 51, who spent his life working in the coal industry and serves on McDowell County's county commission. "Once we shut down the coal industry here there's nowhere to go, there's nothing else to do, there's no other jobs available."

The unemployment rate here was 12.5% in July, compared with 4.9% nationwide.

When work dries up, people leave, Patterson said, doing anything they can to make ends meet.

"She [Hillary Clinton] wants to shut down the coal industry -- that's gonna put me out of a job. Wouldn't be real smart to vote for somebody who's gonna put you out of a job." -- Ryan Barnette, 34

"You can't just go to the next county here, you have to leave the state. A man tries to go out of the state, maintain an apartment, try to keep his home back up here, it just puts such a struggle on the family."

Trump won McDowell handily in West Virginia's May primary, taking 91.5% of the Republican vote -- his largest margin of victory in the country. But even before becoming his party's presumptive nominee the week prior, he was the favorite to win in the state.

During a campaign rally in West Virginia in May, Trump promised to bring back lost-coal mining jobs but hasn't said how he'd pull it off. Many people here were skeptical that he could -- but credit him with giving them hope.

And animosity toward Clinton runs high. Even months later, people still repeat -- verbatim -- the comment Clinton made that her climate change policies would "put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business."

Many people here with ties to the coal industry -- virtually everyone here is linked to it -- see Clinton's comments about coal disqualifying and Trump as their only answer.

"It ain't gonna be Hillary," said 34-year-old Ryan Barnette, his face black with soot, minutes after leaving the mine. "She wants to shut down the coal industry -- that's gonna put me out of a job."

"Our main industry has been coal. When you don't diversify and have other means, then the coal miners are laid off, either they stay and have no money to spend, which trickles down everywhere... Or they eventually have to pack up and move so that they can find work." -- Elaine LaCaria, 54

Elaine Lacaria -- known here as Laney -- was a lifelong Democrat and voted for Clinton eight years ago. But now things have changed.

"I won't vote for her again. No, never," she said in an interview in the dress shop she opened in 2008, the same year then-Senator Barack Obama was elected president.

In the eight years since then, she said things have gotten worse. Jobs have dried up, people are leaving and not coming back and addiction has ravaged this community and others near it.

"When we drive anywhere you see small town USA is no more," Lacaria said. "This has affected all of us, not just the coal fields."

Lacaria said she'll never vote for a Democrat again and this year, she'll support Trump.

"When I see Trump as a businessman, I think he will help our county definitely, but I think he will help our country as a whole. He knows what he's doing."

Patterson, who also said he plans to vote for Trump due to his support of the coal industry, said the same.

"When we wake up the morning after an election, our roads are going to be getting worse, our sewer, our water, our schools are failing, Patterson said. "They want us to keep paying more and we keep getting less, so there's my take on where we're at the day after the election."

"We look different, we talk different, and people seem to think we don't exist. But if you're hungry, we'll split our last meal with you. If you're cold, we'll get you some kind of--to stay warm. We give everything that we got. And we get nothing back." -- Vira Rose, 69

Others, like 69-year-old Vira Rose, say no politician or government got them in this position. And they don't expect to be saved.

Rose, who was one of the first women to work as a mine foreman in the area, owns her own auto repair shop. She once sold new tires, now a stack of used tires for sale sits outside of the shop. People can't afford new ones anymore, she said.

"Sometimes I come here at 8 a.m., I get out of here at 8 or 9 at night. Any job comes, you don't turn it down and say tomorrow. If you say tomorrow, tomorrow won't be here. You grab it, you do it -- then you help others," she said. "We're the forgotten tribe."

She has no faith in Clinton or Trump.

"What am I gonna do? I'm not gonna vote for neither damn one of them," Rose said. "Because there's not much difference, there's really not."CNN national security analyst Juliette Kayyem is the author of "Security Mom: An Unclassified Guide to Protecting Our Homeland and Your Home." She is a professor at Harvard's Kennedy School, a former assistant secretary of Homeland Security in the Obama administration and founder of Kayyem Solutions, a security consulting firm. The opinions expressed in this commentary are hers.

(CNN) While President Trump stumbles along with his executive order (now blocked by a federal appeals court) banning immigration from seven countries, an important reality has been lost in the international criticism and legal analysis: not all seven countries named in the ban are alike.

They are not all enemies of the US -- like Iran -- or nations we have been at war with -- like Iraq or Afghanistan. In fact one of them this week provided a clear example of the perilous geopolitical territory the Trump administration wandered into when its ban not only resulted in confusion, but delivered a serious blow to counterterrorism efforts that help keep America safe.

I'm referring here to Yemen.

In a 24-hour period late last month, Yemen was the focus of not one, but two, important efforts by the Trump administration. On a Friday, the ban was imposed against Yemen. A day later, Trump authorized a raid by special forces to capture the leader of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, Qassim al-Rimi, that resulted in the death of a US Navy SEAL, 13 civilians (according to Yemeni officials) including an 8-year-old gir l and the downing of an Osprey aircraft. The Pentagon said 14 al Qaeda fighters were killed in the battle.

JUST WATCHED Military botches Yemen raid video release Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Military botches Yemen raid video release 02:01

For years during the Bush and Obama administrations, Yemen had cooperated with US efforts, which included drones and ground raids, well aware that many areas in its country were being used by terrorists to train and hide. It never required specific approval, which would have delayed US missions and potentially risked their secrecy.

Yemen's public skepticism and the unclear status of what a "reassessment" actually is present a major impediment to our counterterrorism efforts. In nations like Yemen, with major geographic areas that are essentially failed states, the coalition efforts rely on the host country to allow it to come in and fight terror. That is not an easy agreement for a country like Yemen: it has to deal with internal forces that do not view the United States as a force of good.

The careless mission, coupled with the "in your face" naming in the executive order, were unsustainable affronts to Yemen and it responded in kind. Yemen is not a democratic nation and it is a human rights violator. It is not a friend, in the sense of how Americans view Great Britain or France as friends. But it isn't a foe either.

JUST WATCHED Yemen raid planned under Obama, approved by Trump Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Yemen raid planned under Obama, approved by Trump 03:00

This represents the quintessential challenge of the emerging Trump Doctrine. The President views foreign relations in a binary fashion: nations are good or bad. The world is a little more complicated. Mexico isn't just about a wall, for example; it is a major trading partner. Australia isn't just about a refugee dispute; it is a major ally in our war efforts. Yemen isn't just a state that harbors terrorists; it is a partner in a global mission.

In domestic circles, the debate about whether the now-stalled executive order is good or bad for counterterrorism efforts is being litigated in courts and public opinion. But for Yemen, the inclusion was a blow to a historic expectation that the nations -- for better or for worse, in the gray area or not -- would fight together.

President Trump has said that rescinding the executive order would put our nation at risk. That statement is questionable but clearly a political tactic.

The failed al Qaeda mission and Yemen's response will hinder our ability to engage fully in targeted military efforts to protect our nation in the global war on terror. With friends like us, Yemen found it necessary to reset the relationship.The Chinese government has granted President Trump and his business something they had been seeking for more than a decade: trademark protection for the use of the Trump name in the construction industry.

Trump fought unsuccessfully in Chinese courts for years to try to gain control of the trademark, but his fortunes changed suddenly last year during the latter stages of his campaign for the White House.

China's trademark review board announced in September it had invalidated a rival claim for the Trump trademark, clearing the way for Trump to move in. In November, soon after the election, it awarded the trademark to the Trump Organization. The trademark was officially registered this week after a three-month notice period for objections expired.

The sequence of events makes some ethics experts uncomfortable: Chinese authorities reversed their position as Trump's political star rose.

"China is going to want concessions from Mr. Trump, and this is now the first in what will be a series of efforts to influence him," said Norman Eisen, a White House ethics counsel under President Obama. Eisen is part of a group that has sued Trump for violating the foreign emoluments clause of the Constitution by accepting foreign payments through his business ventures.

But Trump Organization attorneys told CNN that it was simply trying to protect the Trump trademark from someone who had been improperly squatting on it, and that any accusation that President Trump could be compromised by the trademark decision granted by the Chinese government is completely baseless and shows a disregard for the facts.

It is difficult to assess the value of the new trademark. It covers construction-related services, not for Trump's core hospitality and real-estate businesses.

But even if construction-related services are not a core business for the Trump Organization, the company places a great value on anything with the Trump brand.

"The Trump brand is key to the value of the Trump Organization's assets," Sheri Dillon, a Trump lawyer, said last month.

Trump can also argue that he's a lot more famous in China now than he was when he first started the trademark battle there in 2006, giving him a stronger claim to the Trump name. Trump already holds dozens of trademarks in China and is seeking dozens more.

"The Trump Organization has been actively enforcing its trademark rights in China for more than a decade and its latest trademark registration is a natural result of those efforts -- all of which took place years before President Trump even announced his candidacy," said Alan Garten, the Trump Organization's chief legal officer.

The ethics concerns are fueled by Trump's decision not to completely sever ties with his company.

Before taking office, he bucked the advice of ethics lawyers who urged him to avoid conflicts by selling off his vast business interests and putting the money in a blind trust. Instead, he pledged to place his assets in a trust run by his adult sons.

Trump talked tough on China in his campaign rhetoric, but so far hasn't followed through on his threats to label it a currency manipulator on his first day in office, or to impose heavy trade tariffs.

Related: Ethics group lawsuit says Trump is violating Constitution

China legal experts say they think Trump's political ascendancy most likely played a role in the trademark decision.

"I've got clients who have fought these same cases time and time again without success. For this rapid turn of events, it does seem to be more than just a coincidence," said Dan Plane, a China intellectual property expert in Hong Kong. "What's striking about the Trump decision is the timing. I think it's reasonable to assume that politics played a part -- without Trump even necessarily asking for it."

The Chinese Embassy in Washington told CNN that the case was handled in compliance with China's trademark law.

"The Chinese trademark review board does not make its decisions publicly available, so we don't know on what basis they made their decision," said Matthew Dresden, an international trademark attorney. "I think these decisions were not made in a vacuum."

The White House declined to comment, referring the question to the Trump Organization.

Related: What we know, and don't, about Trump's trust

Another interpretation of the decision may simply be that China is becoming more responsive to Western companies that want to protect their trademark. In December, China's top court found in favor of U.S. basketball start Michael Jordan, ruling that a Chinese company sportswear company, Qiaodan, had to stop using the Chinese characters that rendered the name Jordan.

"You could say there's a nice ray of sunshine, that perhaps things are changing for foreign brands," said Plane. "But [the Trump decision] really was a bit of a bolt out of the blue, particularly in relation to the case's history and the decision's timing."

Related: Michael Jordan wins his Chinese name back

One remaining question is whether Trump will continue to find favor in future Chinese trademark decisions.

"If there's a consistent pattern where you have 'wins' in every case to which Trump's name is attached when normally, those cases would be non-starters for anyone else, then yes, I think there's a real concern about his being given something that others wouldn't receive," Plane said.

-- Dugald McConnell, Serena Dong and Cristina Alesci contributed to this story.Story highlights The question is whether Trump is violating the Presidential Records Act of 1978

Trump often deletes tweets from his personal account over spelling mistakes

Washington (CNN) Could the President's Twitter fingers pose a legal challenge?

On Friday, President Donald Trump's Twitter account posted one tweet, deleted it and issued another tweet with similar language.

For posterity's sake, the first tweet read: "The FAKE NEWS media (failing @nytimes, @CNN, @NBCNews and many more) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the American people. SICK!"

It was quickly replaced with: "The FAKE NEWS media (failing @nytimes, @NBCNews, @ABC, @CBS, @CNN) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the American People!"

Deleting a tweet is commonplace -- Twitter does not allow users to edit their messages after they post. The question is whether Trump is violating the Presidential Records Act of 1978, which requires all the president's records be preserved for eventual release to the public on a delayed basis long after the commander in chief leaves office.

Read MoreMichael D'Antonio is the author of "Never Enough: Donald Trump and the Pursuit of Success" (St. Martin's Press).The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) Remember when Donald Trump promised to be the Harlem Globetrotters of politics? "We're gonna win at everything we do!" said Trump. "We're gonna win, win, win. You people, you're gonna be sick and tired of winning." Now he's president of the United States, and Trump has indeed given us tricks and deceptions worthy of the basketball legends . But winning? Not so much.

With flourishes meant to create the image of a commander rapidly transforming Washington, Trump has instead notched one failure after another. Consider this list a lowlights reel:

路 Top national security aide Michael Flynn, caught in a lie, forced to resign.

路 Trump's plan to immediately "repeal and replace" Obamacare is frozen by the reality that he never had actually had a health care plan to substitute.

路 A contentious call with the Prime Minister of Australia (an American ally) concludes when Trump abruptly ends the call.

路 Lies about voter fraud and a "massacre" that never happened have made the administration a laughingstock.

The debacles have been so numerous that Trump's aides, including counselor to the president Kellyanne Conway, press secretary Sean Spicer and senior adviser Stephen Miller, must perform round-the-clock media duties where, deprived of serious facts and policy, they deliver distortions and deceptions.

JUST WATCHED Paul Ryan: Trump right to ask Flynn to resign Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Paul Ryan: Trump right to ask Flynn to resign 00:56

Outrages obscured

Like a building on fire at midnight, the Trump presidency has been such a riveting spectacle that the light and smoke have obscured problems that would have damaged any other new administration. Trump's pick for education secretary, Betsy DeVos, looked like a student who hadn't done her homework as she stumbled through a confirmation hearing, unable to offer coherent answers about students with disabilities or about testing students for their mastery of a subject or their progress with it.

Trump nominated a labor secretary who employed an undocumented worker in his home and a budget chief who failed to pay taxes due on payments made to a nanny.

Steven Mnuchin, nominated to be secretary of the treasury, apparently misled senators who asked him about the aggressive foreclosure activity at a bank he owned.

It should be noted that Mnuchin, who formerly worked as an investment banker, is just one of many wealthy financiers Trump has brought into his administration. After ranting against Wall Street and excoriating his opponent Hillary Clinton for her connections to the financial industry, Trump has abandoned the populism of his campaign and staffed up with a small army of bankers.

He has also moved to dismantle the rules put in place to protect the economy -- and consumers -- from the excesses of the financial industry, which were central to the collapse of markets and the Great Recession that was a legacy of the George W. Bush administration. All this from a president who, at his inauguration, complained of an "establishment (that) protected itself, but not the citizens of our country."

Had any other president abandoned his campaign commitments or nominated such ill-qualified people to serve in the Cabinet, he (or dare I say "she") would have been pilloried in the press for these moves and blocked by Congress. However, Congress is in the hands of Trump's party and thus, remains mostly silent. The press, like the American public, has been so overwhelmed by the Trump frenzy that it has been forced to apply a new standard. Sins that were once regarded as mortal are overlooked because so many bigger outrages require attention.

This is not a surprise

If it seems like it's amateur hour in Washington, that's because it is. Trump's main argument for his candidacy was that he had so little contact with Washington that he represented a radical change. The lies he delivered on the stump were excused as a salesman's exaggerations, not a sign that he suffered from severe character flaws. And besides, most experts didn't give him a real shot at winning. Like the second-rate comic who warms up the audience before a headliner, Trump was entertaining in a crude and unsophisticated way but he wasn't expected to succeed.

Now we have a crude and unsophisticated president whose management skills, which were always hyped beyond reality, are inadequate to the task of running the country. He tried to substitute attitude for aptitude, confidence for competence, and failed time and again.

Ironically, Trump's record was apparent all along, and should have been enough to disqualify him. A real estate deal-maker and TV celebrity, Trump failed repeatedly at the job of running businesses that required his focused attention and he displayed no real concern for the damage he did to investors and contractors. In his public statements about prominent business figures, national leaders, his ex-wives and even his daughter, he spoke with no regard for the effect of his words.

"[Trump has] tried to substitute attitude for aptitude, confidence for competence, and failed time and again. "

As an entrepreneur who controlled privately held companies, Trump indulged his own impulses in ways that revealed profound character flaws. He protected himself by hiring mainly on the basis of loyalty. As he told me, he wasn't much interested in a man or woman's record of achievement. He was looking, instead, for "talent" and commitment. Other qualifications were secondary. If an executive seemed energetic, aggressive, ambitious, and ruthless in the Trump mold, he or she got the job.

The President's past hiring practices help to explain why he has surrounded himself with so many people with no previous experience in government but an abundance of loyalty and nerve. When he built skyscrapers, he didn't require that his executives know how the buildings were constructed, but he wanted them to be so loyal that if he ordered them to climb to the roof and jump off, they just might do it.

We now have a government filled with Trump hires whose flaws seem consistent with the President's own. Gen. Flynn practiced a classic Trump move when he placed calls to Russian officials during the transition and then offered deflections and deceptions when questioned about it. Yesterday he became the first administration official to jump from the roof and sacrifice his reputation and his career. We should expect to see more bodies flying past the windows.Story highlights Jake Turx said he was surprised by Trump's reaction to his question about anti-Semitism

Turx recounted an earlier exchange he had with Trump, "he was very friendly"

(CNN) A Jewish reporter who was called a liar and told to sit down by President Donald Trump after he asked about the rise of anti-Semitism in the United States says he is still hopeful.

"The Trump campaign and transition and now administration have been extremely forthcoming in reaching out to the orthodox Jewish community," Jake Turx, a reporter with Ami Magazine told CNN's John Berman on "Anderson Cooper 360." "I remain extremely confident that they are going to sit down and meet with community leaders and figure out what can be addressed."

Turx told Berman that his question to the President was to simply get his administration's position on how they will try to curb anti-Semitism. Turx prefaced his question by saying that he has not seen anyone in his community that would accuse Trump or his staff of being anti-Semitic.

"See, he said he was going to ask a very simple, easy question, and it's not," Trump interrupted at his press conference on Thursday.

Turx said he was caught off guard by Trump's reaction to his question.

Read MoreStory highlights Sahar Kian's ad for a new roommate includes a "no Trump" clause

She says anyone who supports the President is "by all means a bigot"

(CNN) When 23-year-old Sahar Kian needed a roommate for her home near Georgetown University, she turned to Craigslist. Among her house rules? No alcohol, pets or meat products. And no supporters of President Donald Trump.

"Alcohol, pets and meat products are not allowed in the house," Kian, who works for an education-focused nonprofit organization, wrote in her ad.

"Neither are Trump supporters."

Speaking to CNN's Michael Smerconish on Saturday, Kian rejected the suggestion she was being "a bit intolerant."

"Look at me, I'm brown. I'm a woman. I am somebody who is heavily reliant on Obama's pre-existing condition clause," Kian said, referring to the Affordable Care Act, which bars insurers from banning people with pre-existing medical conditions or asking them to pay higher premiums. High on Trump's to-do list is repealing the law.

Read MoreHilda Roldan just wants a better life for her four kids. She always works overtime at a noisy textile factory here in Puebla, Mexico so her kids can get a college degree and don't have to endure the same hard work.

"I wouldn't like this work for them...I want the best for them. That's why I stay an extra hour [at work] so they can move ahead," Roldan told CNN's Leyla Santiago while wiping away tears.

Roldan is a world away from President Trump in this blue collar town two hours southeast of Mexico City. But his presence -- and the promise to bring manufacturing jobs back to the U.S. -- looms large in her life.

Related: Mexico doubles down on Trump 'contingency plan'

Roldan makes, folds and neatly organizes the T-shirts at the factory. She works 60 hours a week, earning 850 pesos ($42). She's proud her paycheck can help support her two daughters and sons, who range in age from two to 19.

She's worked at the same plant for 10 years and giggles when she talks about how she knows the place inside out.

She fears Trump could take this job that she prizes so much. She says going north for work isn't an option.

"The question is: What are we going to do?" Roldan asks. "I wouldn't go" to the United States for work.

It's manufacturing jobs like Roldan's that Trump has promised to bring back to America. In 2000, there were 385,000 Americans working in textile mills. Today there are only 112,000, according to Labor Department data. More broadly, the U.S. has lost 5 million manufacturing job over that time.

Related: Mexican farmer's daughter: NAFTA destroyed us

Experts say the vast majority of those jobs aren't coming back.

"There is no infrastructure to produce textiles in the U.S. nor are there workers who would be willing to work for those wages," says Carlos Peyrelongue, a research analyst at Bank of Americ (BAC)in Mexico City.

Peyrelongue warns that bringing back jobs like Roldan's to the U.S. would mean American shoppers would pay "substantially more, we're talking, 30%, 40%, 50%, 100% more" for clothes because U.S. workers are paid a lot more.

Roldan doesn't know the details of Trump's potential trade policies, such as a possible 20% tax on all Mexican imports into the U.S. But they are besides the point: Trump is bad news in her eyes.

"I feel like all this would go down, economically," says Roldan, referring to Puebla. "There's going to be more vandalism, corruption -- a lot more than what we are already living with."

Roldan's home state would be a prime target for Trump to bring manufacturing jobs of all types back to the U.S. It's population has boomed since 1994 when NAFTA, the free trade deal between Canada, Mexico and the U.S., took effect.

Trump blames NAFTA for a flood of manufacturing jobs to places like Puebla, and threatens to withdraw from the deal if it isn't improved to benefit U.S. workers.

"It has been a one-sided deal from the beginning of NAFTA with massive numbers of jobs and companies lost," Trump tweeted on Jan. 26.

Related: Mexico's biggest fear right now is not Trump

Congressional nonpartisan research in 2015 concluded that NAFTA wasn't responsible for an exodus of jobs.

Still, workers from around Mexico have poured into Puebla over the last two and a half decades.

In 1990, the state of Puebla had 4.1 million residents. In 2015, over 6.1 million Mexicans called Puebla home. Car dealerships and manufacturing plants are everywhere here. Volkswagen's largest plant outside of Germany is in Puebla. Audi just opened a plant in Puebla in September. You can't miss trucks carrying newly finished cars.

While Roldan fears Trump puts her job at risk, her boss, Gustavo Bojalil, warns that Trump better be careful what he wishes for. Roldan might not go to the U.S. but Bojalil argues many other Mexicans workers will.

"If there's less work here, what do you think is going to happen? More Mexicans are going to go to the United States," says Bojalil, who employs 180 workers at his plant in Puebla.Washington (CNN) Some Pentagon officials believe Russia is testing President Donald Trump with aggressive moves across the globe.

Moscow recently deployed a banned land-based cruise missile, dispatched a spy ship up the Atlantic coast and buzzed an American warship in the Black Sea.

"They were likely intended to test the new administration," one defense official told CNN.

"The Russians are doing different things to see how the new administration will respond," a second defense official added.

The developments raise the question of how the new White House occupant will address Russian assertiveness and whether, after complimenting Russian President Vladimir Putin and playing down Russia's adversarial relationship with the US, Trump will resort to any confrontational responses.

Trump, for his part, dismissed the idea that Russia was testing him and attributed its recent moves to Putin's belief that the new US president was politically constrained and incapable of striking a deal with Russia.

"All of those things that you mentioned are very recent, because probably Putin assumes that he's not going to be able to make a deal with me because it's politically not popular for me to make a deal," Trump said during a news conference Thursday.

In contrast, both defense officials noted that Russia's military posture has become increasingly assertive in recent years and assessed that Moscow was likely to test any new administration regardless of its perceptions of the commander-in-chief's latitude to cut a deal.

In the case of the spy ship currently off the coast of Virginia, the defense official said that its mission was likely planned before the election, as the ship left its home port near Murmansk on the Arctic Ocean in mid-December.

Analysts also agreed that the moves were intended to gauge the new White House, but they said the uptick in activity could be in part because they are taking an increasingly dim view of Trump's likelihood of building a warmer relationship with Moscow.

"They are trying to figure out where they stand," Magnus Nordenman, the director of the Transatlantic Security Initiative at the Washington-based Atlantic Council, told CNN.

"Moscow is testing and prodding to see where they are," he said.

Joerg Forbrig, a Berlin-based expert on Eastern European affairs at the German Marshall Fund, told CNN that Russia's actions "are just the most recent in a long series of Russian military provocations vis--vis NATO member states."

"That said, the latest posturing is certainly tailored specifically to the United States at its time of transition to a new administration," he added.

Both Nordenman and Forbrig said Moscow had stepped back such actions during the transition from President Barack Obama to Trump, but now it was back to pushing the United States.

"The Kremlin paused its hostile actions and rhetoric for a few weeks of US political transition," Forbrig said, calling the latest actions a "return to adversarial normalcy."

In the case of the Black Sea incident, a spokesman for the Russian Ministry of Defense denied that Russian attack jets had buzzed the USS Porter, though the US military released images of the plane flying by the US ship.

According to a third US defense official, the Russian action was "in direct response" to recent NATO activities there.

The Russian actions "are to intimidate Western politics and publics," Forbirg said. "They paint the image of a powerful opponent that is able and willing to challenge Western security."

Forbirg added that the provocations were likely to continue.

"Russia has lost its hope to reach a better working relationship with the Trump administration than with its predecessor," he said.

That echoes Trump's assertion that Russia is taking a harsher stance because it sees limited opportunities for rapprochement with the new US administration.

A spokesman for the Kremlin said his government never viewed Trump with too much optimism.

"Over the period of the last few months, we kept saying that we've never worn rose-colored glasses or cherished excessive illusions," spokesman Dmitry Peskov told Russian media in a Friday morning conference call. "So we have nothing to be disappointed about."

Nordenman said the recent Russian actions would only "marginally" complicate any effort to improve the relationship unless such provocations continue.

He said the US response could range from ignoring the activity, making a diplomatic protest or positioning more US troops in allied countries closer to Russia and conducting more exercises.

Questioned at the Thursday news conference on how he would respond to the recent Russian activity, Trump responded that it was "not good."

But he later elaborated, "I'm not going to tell you anything about what response I do. I don't talk about military response."

He added, "So when you ask me what am I going to do with a ship, the Russian ship as an example, I'm not going to tell you. But hopefully, I won't have to do anything."

At another point he stressed, "It would be great if we could get along with Russia."

For now, the US and NATO have continued apace, sending more troops and ships to the region in response to Russia's 2014 invasion and occupation of Crimea and for Moscow's role in the violence in Eastern Ukraine.

Russia's ambassador to NATO, Alexander Grushko, slammed NATO's presence in the region, writing on twitter that "the decision to increase NATO's naval presence in the Black Sea is another step towards escalating tensions with Russia."

Moscow has taken steps to bolster its forces in southern Russia and is "rearming" its units in Crimea, Grushko added.

Nordenman also said it was "typical" for Moscow to attempt these types of actions during major NATO meetings like Wednesday's summit of allied defense ministers in Brussels, Belgium, which was attended by Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis.Ana Navarro, a Republican strategist and commentator, was national Hispanic campaign chairwoman for John McCain in 2008, national Hispanic co-chair for Jon Huntsman's 2012 campaign and was supporting Jeb Bush's candidacy for 2016. Follow her on Twitter @ananavarro . The opinions expressed in this commentary are hers.

(CNN) Yes, folks. It is really happening. Donald Trump is swearing-in as the 45th president of the United States.

Since his election, I have heard Trump opponents grasp at straws and wild theories in the hope that this day would not come. First, they put their hopes in recounts in the states. The result did not change. Then, it was about persuading electors not to vote for Trump in the Electoral College. That did not work.

Then, the question was: Can he be impeached -- because of the Russian interference, because of conflicts of interest, because his hair is funny. That didn't work either.

Breathe deep. Take a big gulp of whatever alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage you have near you. And brace for the reality. On Friday he becomes President Donald J. Trump. Yikes!

Unfortunately, we are no less divided as a nation today than we were the day after the election. In fact, we may be more polarized. The sides have entrenched themselves. Trump supporters, regardless of how crazy and unpresidential an action he may take or a tweet he may send out, think the man does no wrong. And Trump opponents question his legitimacy.

As I head toward Trump's swearing-in, the surreal has become real.

I boarded a flight from Miami to Washington. Many passengers were Trump supporters, traveling to the capital to participate in inaugural festivities. Many more of the passengers were women of all ages, colors and walks of life heading to the Saturday Women's March.

Part of me was praying that World War III did not break out between these two divergent groups during the flight. And part of me was struck by the symbolism. It was one of those "only in America" moments.

Unless you are news deprived or have been living in the International Space Station for the last 18 months, you know I don't like Trump. Actually, that is an understatement. While I do not refer to his supporters as deplorable, I am perfectly comfortable referring to him as that.

Trump enabled, allowed, peddled to and promoted the worst in America -- racism, division, discrimination, misogyny -- during his campaign. I will never forget or forgive him for that. Never. I am, however, prepared to judge him separately on how he performs as President. When he tries to do good things to improve the lives of Americans, I will commend him. When he tries to do things that I think will cause our country harm and further divide us, I will fight him hard.

JUST WATCHED Voight on Trump: God answered our prayers Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Voight on Trump: God answered our prayers 01:02

That said, today Americans  those who voted for Trump and those who didn't -- still have reasons to celebrate. I am celebrating that I live in a country where we've enjoyed over 240 years of Democratic succession.

I am celebrating that we are on our 45th peaceful transfer of power from one US president to another.

I am celebrating that we live in a country where I am not forced to attend a state-sponsored event. There are regimes all over the world where citizens face government reprisals if they don't show up to wave flags, clap and fake enthusiasm at official events. Cuba, just 90 miles from our shores, is one such country.

JUST WATCHED Trump promises change on inauguration eve Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump promises change on inauguration eve 02:24

There are places in the world where protesting against a government leader could result in anything from unemployment or harassment to beatings, imprisonment or death. We live in a country where we are free to criticize, question and scrutinize our elected officials.

Some Americans question Donald Trump's legitimacy as president. Others are angry any questioning occurs. Let's not forget that one of Donald Trump's claims to fame was precisely such questioning. He openly doubted the legitimacy -- more than that, the citizenship -- of President Barack Obama.

These next four years are not going to be easy. The 2016 campaign -- and all that has followed -- has strained relationships between friends, colleagues, family and neighbors. It has even raised conflict between strangers.

Here is the most important thing for us all to remember, for the sake of our common sanity and safety: In America, the right to vote and democratically elect a president is just as precious and valued as the right to protest and express yourself against that president.

There is nothing more American than acknowledging that even if we don't agree politically, even if we don't agree with the President, even if we don't like each other, all of us have the same rights. If we remember that one thing, we will be OK.Donald Trump's version of the Lincoln model: less team and more rivals. "He manages by conflict," says one source close to the White House who is familiar with Trump's management style. "And in the end, if there's conflict, he likes it because he can steer the point of view himself."

In business, it often worked. In the campaign, it clearly worked. But inside the new White House  and with a new team of Cabinet members  not so much. It's a combustible combination: a staff searching for defined roles and a more deliberative policy process and a president who likes to freelance.

Poking Australia's Prime Minister and Mexico's President in the eye, issuing an executive action on immigration without reaching out to GOP leaders, is part of the new normal. So is a President who tweets furiously at whim, even deriding the federal judge who reversed his travel ban as a "so-called judge."

The staff is already spent, just two weeks in. At the President's direction they're trying to wrestle control of the policy process through the chief of staff, Reince Priebus, as first reported by CNN'S Dana Bash. But the real staff problem may be trying to figure out how to deal with an often impetuous and off-script President they also aim to please. (See: Trump's generous comments on Putin's Russia.) "He just needs some managing," according to one source close to the White House. "It's not a healthy thing having nobody tell you the truth." Or worse yet, getting blind affirmation.

Home alone

Despite the flurry of controversy, sources who have spoken with the President say he's happy living in the White House. His wife, Melania, remains in New York, at least for now. The official line is that she will move to DC at the end of the school year, but sources caution that while that is likely, it is not set in stone. In the meantime, daughter Ivanka accompanied Trump to Dover Air Force Base as the commander in chief paid his respects to a soldier killed in action, the first on his watch. It was a reminder that the first lady is not in town.

And that the President is literally home alone. "When you're there by yourself, you don't really settle into a regular family life, so it's easier to think  and govern  like it's still the campaign," worries one Trump ally. "And you grow isolated." So the new President lives upstairs by himself, keeps long hours, watches TV, and, of course, tweets. Then it's rinse and repeat.

But keeping the pace of a whirling dervish is exactly what Trump wanted and continues to crave, which is why executive orders have been so appealing, despite past GOP complaints that Barack Obama used them too much. He's thrilled with his Supreme Court pick, his multiple photo ops and with his congressional call to action on numerous fronts. "The American people wanted to see action," says one senior White House adviser. "And they got it." Sure, Trump was critical of the immigration order rollout and the communications shop in general, but he asked for early action  early "wins," one administration source says  and governing by signature seems to provide that.

The world is paying attention. So is the American public, but with negative reviews. In a CNN/ORC International Poll released Friday, Americans gave Trump the highest disapproval rating for any newly elected president since pollsters began tracking that data.

All of which raises the question: When making decisions, where does he get his advice? According to sources within and outside the White House, the President has set up a hydra-headed structure that needs work. After a rough start, staffers have recently gone out of their way to say they're working well together. But there's no denying history: Priebus, who chose Sean Spicer to be the administration's public voice, has had to make some adjustment. To begin with, the former chairman of the Republican National Committee is not used to saluting a boss. "Reince has never been a staffer," says one knowledgeable source. "Everybody is still trying to feel each other out."

And learning how to run a government has exposed fissures. "Reince should be the logical person, along with the vice president, to create a simpler path for information and decisions to flow," says one Trump ally, who also cautions that, during the campaign, Priebus and Trump did not have a "perfect relationship."

Then again, who does? Consolidating trust and power for Priebus may be a tad easier after the immigration order fiasco and the President's designation of him as his chief conduit. Senior adviser Kellyanne Conway is likely to coordinate communications. She "has endeared herself to Trump by being the pit bull, by going out there and doing the unthinkable," says one source close to the White House. Of course, Conway's "Bowling Green massacre" mistake last week was a reminder that misstatements, when coming from a White House mouthpiece, are magnified.

What's missing

All of which leads to the missing ingredient in the West Wing: experience. The refrain that "he needs a Jim Baker (Ronald Reagan's ex-chief of staff)" is common among both Republicans and Democrats these days. A person Trump regards as a peer would go a long way toward focusing him on governing and away from campaign mode. The problem, says one ally, is that Trump thinks he is his own Jim Baker.

And, to state the obvious, Steve Bannon is no Jim Baker, nor does he want to be. After a smartly executed campaign, Chief White House Strategist Bannon no longer needs any introduction, especially after appearing on the cover of Time magazine, a perch previously reserved just for the President himself. If Trump sees himself as the leader of a movement, Bannon is the movement's architect. It's no secret he believes that real change comes through complete disruption.

His appointment, as a political adviser, to become a principal sitting on the President's National Security Council raised eyebrows, and ire. "It's unprecedented," says a former senior Obama national security adviser. "Steve Bannon is not the equivalent of the secretary of the defense. The President can get his political advice in another forum. It's dangerous and insulting to the rest of the national security team." Insulting, maybe, but the President doesn't care.

If Trump sees a forceful intellect in Bannon, the senior adviser also has a forceful ally: Trump son-in-law Jared Kushner. Kushner, who is 36 and married to Ivanka Trump, has no government experience, but became close to Bannon during the campaign. "Jared realizes that Bannon has the floor on explaining the administration's revolution," says one knowledgeable source. "And he may be able to help by taking some of the edges off."

But Kushner's portfolio is much larger than that: He's at the helm of a small group that wants to do nothing less than overhaul Washington's calcified bureaucracy. And Trump himself has said he wants his son-in-law to be at the center of negotiating Mideast peace, and Kushner hasn't been shy at getting that message out. "The fact that he tells everybody 'I'm the guy' shows bad judgment," says a former high-ranking Obama administration official. But he's the President's son-in-law, and becomes a first among equals, another tricky personnel matter.

In all of this, there is the question of the role of Vice President Mike Pence. He has made a point of sticking closely by the President these days, standing alongside him at multiple photo ops, taking the Presidential Daily Brief (even when Trump does not), serving as the President's liaison to Capitol Hill.

After the controversial immigration executive order, Pence played the role of sounding board at his old haunt in Congress. "On the one hand, we keep hearing publicly of complaints that Congress wasn't consulted," says one senior administration official. "But privately, we're hearing 'keep it up, things are great. There's more energy in our conference than ever before.' "

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

Pence, a relative newbie in Trumpworld, is sticking to his job description: making sure Cabinet members get confirmed, smoothing the way for the confirmation of Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch, trying to figure out the "repeal and replace Obamacare" conundrum. And most of all, not allowing any daylight between himself and the President.

There's a hope among both the President's detractors and allies that, with the confirmation of Gen. James Mattis at Defense, Gen. John Kelly at Homeland Security and former Exxon CEO Rex Tillerson at State, the circle of advice-givers will be broader and deeper, and powerful enough to keep the most aggressive advisers from wading onto their turf. On Tillerson's first full day as secretary of state, the White House released a statement saying that new Israeli settlements "may not be helpful" in achieving peace. And UN ambassador Nikki Haley delivered a stern warning to Russia on its aggression in Ukraine. Not the usual Trump messages.

Now all the White House has to do is figure out who is actually speaking for the President.Paul Begala, a Democratic strategist and CNN political commentator, was a political consultant for Bill Clinton's presidential campaign in 1992 and was counselor to Clinton in the White House. He was a consultant to Priorities USA Action, the pro-Hillary Clinton super PAC. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) In the face of mounting revelations of contacts between his campaign advisers and Russian intelligence, Donald Trump's best strategy is to come clean: release his tax returns , answer all questions, recuse Attorney General Jeff Sessions from any inquiries and fully cooperate with an independent investigation. That is the only way to put to rest once and for all the notion that the President is compromised by our adversaries in Moscow.

Fat chance.

Skilled in the dark arts of deception, Trump instead is turning to a favorite tactic, one that has served him well in the past: Deploy weapons of mass distraction. "Look over there!" he yells, and we do. As a reality TV star, he knows our attention span is short, our desire for drama acute and our interest in shiny new objects extreme.

So he's shouting "Sabotage!" He's decrying leaks, and his allies are calling for an investigation of the leakers. Not of the Russians. Not of the campaign advisers who U.S. investigators' allege spoke with Russians repeatedly throughout the campaign. Not of the supposed compromising information the Russians are reported to have on our new President. No, he's attacking the whistleblowers.

Keep in mind that when he paid $25 million to people suing him for fraud over Trump University, he distracted the media by tweeting an attack on the cast of the Broadway musical "Hamilton. " Mr. Trump apparently thought it was rude for cast members to lecture Mike Pence about diversity and inclusion. Because we all know Donald Trump is a stickler for good manners.

But it won't work this time. Because this time the story goes on, whether he likes it or not. Nothing short of full disclosure and an independent investigation will end the story of Russia's attempt to tilt the election to Trump.

Donald Trump whining about leaks is like Jack the Ripper complaining about paper cuts. He is President in large part due to leaks. Had the Russians not hacked and robbed the emails of the Democratic National Committee and of Secretary Hillary Clinton's campaign chairman, and then weaponized them through WikiLeaks, Trump would probably not be president. In a race determined by fewer than 80,000 votes, that's hard to dispute.

And in the final days of the campaign, FBI Director James Comey released a letter which essentially reopened an investigation into Hillary Clinton's emails once again -- based on....well, nothing. Turned out those Anthony Weiner emails had nothing to do with Hillary Clinton's case. But the damage was done.

JUST WATCHED Manafort, Flynn spoke regularly with Russians Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Manafort, Flynn spoke regularly with Russians 01:43

It should be noted that Comey apparently knew about the Trump operatives' contacts with the Russians. But somehow that never leaked. The contrast between how Comey handled the Clinton case and how he handled the Trump-Russia case boggles the mind.

Donald Trump has benefited from leaks more than the CEO of Depends. So forgive me if I am unpersuaded by Trump's complaints about them.

They will keep coming. Perhaps because the system of checks and balances seems to be broken. With Republican control of Congress, a full congressional investigation is unlikely. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Kentucky) candidly told us why. "I just don't think it's useful to be doing investigation after investigation," Paul told the "Kilmeade & Friends" radio show. "Particularly of your own party. We'll never even get started with doing the things we need to do, like repealing Obamacare, if we're spending our whole time having Republicans investigate Republicans. I think it makes no sense."

Republicans don't investigate Republicans. Congressional Republicans will not fulfill their oversight obligations; that might interfere with important things, like kicking 20 million Americans off health insurance.

JUST WATCHED Flynn called victim of political assassination Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Flynn called victim of political assassination 01:29

So sensible whistleblowers probably won't go to the Hill. And they may not trust the Justice Department, either. After all, our new attorney general was an early and effective Trump supporter, and he has no appetite for recusing himsel f from investigating a campaign he played a crucial role in.

That leaves the free press. The Fourth Estate is the only option for whistleblowers. When the justice system seems compromised and congressional oversight is negligent, government officials with damning information are going to leak. And leak. And leak.

I suppose there is some poetic justice in seeing the man who was made President because of leaks potentially hobbled by them. If you live by the leak, you die by the leak.Michael D'Antonio is the author of the book "Never Enough: Donald Trump and the Pursuit of Success" (St. Martin's Press).The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) President for just two weeks, Donald Trump is courting a constitutional crisis over his ban on travelers from seven Muslim-majority countries.

He has spooked allies around the world, fired the acting attorney general , feuded with Arnold Schwarzenegger over TV ratings and inspired millions to protest in the streets.

Remarkably, Trump has managed to create all this excitement, drama and chaos with little effort.

The spree of irresponsibility has involved both putting his signature on hastily drafted documents and firing off words in public or on Twitter.

Trump's tweet about the "so-called" judge who stopped his anti-immigrant/anti-refugee order, for example, was uniquely impulsive for a modern President.

After each of these moves, Trump has then stood back and watched the world struggle to respond.

The easiest way to understand why Trump does all this might be to call it political arson.

The analogy isn't perfect, but consider how Trump and a skeleton White House crew have used multiple incendiary actions to create a sense of emergency, while expressing little concern for those who are affected.

This is precisely how an arsonist disturbs the peace. With a flick of a match, he sets a destructive fire and then thrills to the reactions.

Likewise, the nation and the world are reacting in the way of a city besieged by a fire-setter. Fear and confusion reign and, before an effective response develops, it seem as though stability will never return.

The arsonist mentality

Experts writing in the Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law note that pyromania is a "disorder of impulse" afflicting people whose moods are out of sync with their objective reality. If it is not stopped and addressed -- either by the criminal justice system or mental health intervention -- the arsonist's behavior becomes a chronic problem. This is why communities under an arsonist's attack will be plagued by one fire after another.

Does Donald Trump fit the arsonist profile? His impulsiveness has been evident throughout his life. As a boy he was so out of control that his parents sent him away to military school for discipline. In business, a big humiliating bankruptcy wasn't enough to stop his risk-taking. He went on to suffer three more. Instead of one headline-grabbing public divorce he had two.

In his campaign for President, he could not control his provocative behavior. When violence loomed at his rallies he used his microphone to encourage it . In debates and campaign speeches he torched his rivals with a stream of personal insults and distortions (such as repeating unsubstantiated claims from the National Enquirer that Ted Cruz's father helped killed JFK ) never seen in a modern major party candidate.

JUST WATCHED Donald Trump implies Rafael Cruz knew JFK assassin Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Donald Trump implies Rafael Cruz knew JFK assassin 01:29

Trump set fire to the GOP, happily burning down the structure for his own benefit.

As President, Trump's behavior has frequently contradicted the mood of what was going on around him. At his inauguration he didn't celebrate with a positive vision of the country, but instead described a nation on the brink of dystopia. A prayer breakfast became a forum for boasting. At a visit to the Central Intelligence Agency he complained about the press.

Were Trump alone in his impulsive and dark-minded condition he might have been contained by sober advisers. Instead, he has been aided mainly by an adviser, Stephen Bannon, who is committed to upending the political order and rose to prominence as head of a website that dispenses bigoted messages.

Apparently the most influential man in Trump's orbit, Bannon has no experience in public service and has likened himself, and his followers, to "know-nothing vulgarians."

The arson dynamic

Although arsonists frequently plead not guilty by reason of insanity, they rarely win this argument. This is because they are not generally considered to be delusional or otherwise separated from reality.

Simply put, they know what they are doing, and they know that it is wrong, but the compulsion is too strong and the thrill of the crime is too great. This issue was settled in a case involving a fire-setter who lit a barn ablaze , gazed at it from a distance, reported the fire and then asked the first responders if he could ride along with them to the scene.

In communities besieged by an arsonist, residents and public officials may fail at first to recognize what's happening. A spate of fires can seem simply a matter of coincidence until the pattern is established and the problem gets worse.

By then the public is alarmed and afraid and investigators are hard-pressed to stop the destruction. In the early 2000s, for instance, officials in greater Washington finally realized they had a serial fire-setter on their hands when Thomas Sweatt crossed into Maryland to commit one of his crimes.

With political arson, once it is recognized, it is not as mysterious as the problem of a fire-setter working under the cover of night to torch buildings.

Trump's destructive tendencies were once obscured by the notion that he would act as a normal President when the weight of the office settled upon him. This cover was blown when he issued his anti-immigrant executive order. Trump and his team have also signaled their disrupting intentions with diatribes against the press, assertions of "alternative facts," and wild claims about voter fraud that cast doubt on the foundation of American democracy.

Countering the chaos

One textbook on arson notes that people who set fires like to feel they have outsmarted the authorities and enjoy testing their intelligence against them. They are adept at reading others and not generally burdened by feelings of guilt. Some experts recommend sending female investigators to interrogate male suspects, believing they may slip up because they feel insulted under their questioning. The point here is that overconfidence and arrogance can make an arsonist vulnerable to those who set out to stop the crisis.

In the case of Sweatt, a determined and massive investigation led to the discovery of a small flaw in his methods. He used bits of his own clothing to make his fires and the remains contained DNA evidence.

JUST WATCHED A credibility problem for the White House? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH A credibility problem for the White House? 04:31

Trump's political arson is now encountering a massive and increasingly well-organized opposition. Like a community terrorized by fire, the nation was temporarily shaken, but it is recovering its balance. Citizens gathering in the street and at airports signal resolve. Journalists monitor every development. Court cases brought in defense of the Constitution resemble firefighters' efforts to put out the flames.

In Washington state, a federal court order halting the Trump immigration ban across the country represented a defining act on behalf of a national community reacting to crisis. Although many Americans remain alarmed by the emergency created by the new administration, the response of the courts and others has been remarkably swift. In just two weeks, a White House devoted to chaos has been stopped, at least temporarily, by a system designed to put out fires.Marc J. Randazza is a Las Vegas-based First Amendment attorney and managing partner of the Randazza Legal Group. Follow him on Twitter: @marcorandazza. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) Donald Trump has said a lot of strange things -- some funny, some creepy, but none scarier than what he said on Friday : that if he is elected president, he will "open up our libel laws" to make it easier to sue the media and "win lots of money." No matter what you may think about his other policy ideas, if he keeps this promise, we won't be able to effectively express dissent against anything else he might want to do. We can fight any bad policy if we have a robust First Amendment.

Some say that Trump is just being a blowhard, that he doesn't know what he is talking about, and that for all his bluster, there is nothing he could or would do.

I am not so sure. Trump has a history of filing SLAPP suits. SLAPP stands for Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation. This describes a lawsuit filed against someone for exercising his or her First Amendment rights -- filed with little chance of success, but with the knowledge that the lawsuit itself is the punishment. After all, if people have to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to defend themselves because they criticized Donald Trump, they might think better of doing so again in the future.

However, some states, like California and Nevada , have strong anti-SLAPP laws, which dispense with such cases early and force the plaintiff to pay the defendant's attorneys' fees. (Full disclosure: I was instrumental in urging passage of the Nevada Anti-SLAPP law.)

Trump recently got stung with an anti-SLAPP decision, which he probably had in mind when he spoke about "opening up" our libel laws. In fact, he isn't the first big shot to try to make it easier to sue for defamation after having a SLAPP suit blow up in his face.

Therefore, Trump is clearly frustrated with anti-SLAPP laws (which shows that they work) and the landmark defamation case, New York Times v. Sullivan.

When people say that Trump can't do anything about defamation law at the federal level, I think they miss the point that there is a lot of support for a federal anti-SLAPP law. I think we need one, and in fact, HR 2304 was one such proposal this last session. If it passes, we could expect President Trump to veto it.

Beyond new federal legislation, defamation law is a matter of state law, leaving little for a president to do about it. To win a defamation case, the plaintiff must show publication of a false statement of fact that damages the plaintiff's reputation. This standard can vary a bit from state to state, but it generally fits that general set of requirements.

Therefore, what could Trump do to "open up" the libel laws? He personally? Nothing legally, but if elected, he could pick Supreme Court justices willing to revisit New York Times v. Sullivan, which is in my view the most important case protecting our First Amendment rights. It is the greatest protection we have from government officials or powerful businesses choking the life out of public debate and a free press. Overturning it would change everything we know about freedom of the press.

In a defamation case involving an ordinary citizen suing for defamation, the citizen only needs to show that the defendant knew the statement was false, or failed to exercise "reasonable care" before publishing it. So let's say that a blogger writes an article about a private citizen accusing that person of a crime, based on a false statement by a witness, without following up. That might be a failure to exercise reasonable care, and the blogger might lose the case.

But if the same blogger wrote one about a public figure, like Trump, then Trump has to prove that the blogger did so with "actual malice."

Even some judges and lawyers get this wrong, so don't feel bad if you didn't know what "actual malice" means. It has nothing to do with "malice" at all. It means that the defendant published the statement knowing it was false or with a reckless disregard for the truth.

So if we return to my example, let's say someone wrote a blog post about Donald Trump, accusing him of a crime, but based it just on an anonymous email, without following up -- that might be considered to be "reckless disregard."

Why the different standard depending on the plaintiff?

From New York Times v. Sullivan: "(W)e consider this case against the background of a profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open, and that it may well include vehement, caustic, and sometimes unpleasantly sharp attacks on government and public officials."

Debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open... Justice William Brennan

How beautiful that language is. It encapsulates what America is all about, the way only Justice William Brennan could.

The court recognized that public figures have access to the media to defend themselves, and it went on to reject any notion that the speaker must prove truth; instead the plaintiff must prove falsity. This is all because the First Amendment needs "breathing space" in order for free speech to survive. And if we impose liability for merely erroneous reports on political conduct, it would reflect the "obsolete doctrine that the governed must not criticize their governors."

So what if Trump appoints one or two Supreme Court judges who are willing to overturn Sullivan? Justice Elena Kagan has already voiced skepticism about the extension of Sullivan too far into other kinds of libel cases. The only member of the court I think we could count on to be strongly opposed to overturning it is Chief Justice John Roberts.

No matter how flawed it is, our democracy depends upon robust free speech and free press rights. New York Times v. Sullivan matters more than anything else. If we lose the right to criticize the government in wide-open and robust debate, we lose an important part of what it means to be free.Washington (CNN) Zac Petkanas thought he was done with politics after the 2016 election. He was ready to move into the private sector -- or maybe chase a dream job in the art world.

Then his boss, Hillary Clinton, lost.

Within 48 hours -- infuriated by the Cabinet prospects being floated by Donald Trump's transition team, like Wisconsin sheriff David Clarke for homeland security secretary -- Petkanas had decided he couldn't change careers yet.

"Tuesday was the election. Wednesday I was sleepless and tired and very sad," he said. "And Thursday I got extremely angry."

Petkanas quickly transitioned from Clinton's director of rapid response -- a role that made him the campaign's chief Trump hit man -- to director of the Democratic National Committee's war room, where he'd lead the party's resistance to Trump's actions.

"The signals that were coming out of the White House lit a fire under a lot of people," Petkanas said. "He re-engaged a whole slew of people, talented people, driven people, to stay in the fight."

But many of her former staffers -- especially mid-level Brooklyn veterans -- are now on the front lines of the left's anti-Trump resistance.

Many say they're apoplectic over revelations that top Trump advisers were in constant contact with Russians known to US intelligence during the campaign.

Some ex-Clinton staffers have moved into Democratic organizations that are shifting their focus to opposing Trump -- such as Clinton press secretary Brian Fallon, now a senior adviser to Priorities USA; policy adviser Corey Ciorciari, now helming the Center for American Progress war room's policy and research efforts; and Cristobal Alex, Clinton's national deputy director of voter outreach and mobilization, who is now the president of the Latino Victory Fund.

Others are racing to fill the holes in the Democratic Party exposed by November's results, in an effort to help activists newly energized by Trump's victory strike back in upcoming elections, at congressional town halls and more.

Clinton veterans' new projects

One example many Clinton veterans point to: Run for Something, which launched on Trump's Inauguration Day with the goal of recruiting, training and funding first-time candidates for office.

It was co-founded by Amanda Litman, the Clinton campaign's email director, who said in the immediate aftermath of the election, she was looking for a new challenge after several years in online fundraising.

After the election, though, she said she and other Clinton staffers felt like they had failed.

"Once we got over the shock and the sadness and the heavy drinking -- catching up on sleep, cleaning my apartment for the first time in six months -- a bunch of us were talking about different things," she said. "Do you stay in politics because it's incredibly important? Do you leave because you're so cynical and jaded and feel like the work we've been doing doesn't matter?"

Once Litman chose the first option, she leaned heavily on Clinton campaign staffers.

She said Run for Something was built through volunteer efforts of Clinton veterans: The campaign's website director built Run for Something's website for free; Clinton's finance team helped Litman figure out how to raise money. Many of its 1,000 operatives who have volunteered to help future candidates are Clinton alumni.

Litman said friends asked her why she wasn't spending more time going out and relaxing after the election. But she came to feel like she had two options: working, or yelling at the television as news of Trump's transition moves came in.

"One is productive and one scares my dog," she said.

Fueling the Trump resistance

Litman met her co-founder, Ross Morales Rocketto, through his wife, former Clinton digital staffer Jess Morales Rocketto -- who is now organizing airport protests and consulting for United We Dream and the National Domestic Workers Alliance in fighting Trump's executive order banning immigration from seven majority Muslim countries.

JUST WATCHED Chelsea Clinton finds her voice Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Chelsea Clinton finds her voice 01:57

Other Clinton staffers are filling out the offices of rising Democratic stars like California Sen. Kamala Harris -- who hired ex-Clinton aides Lily Adams and Tyrone Gayle to lead her communications shop. Washington Rep. Pramila Jayapal hired Clinton veteran Omer Farooque as communications director.

Clinton campaign rapid response team veteran Jesse Lehrich is leading communications for Organizing for Action, while Clinton rapid response spokeswoman Adrienne Watson is the Democratic National Committee's national press secretary.

Another former Clinton communications staffer, Xochitl Hinojosa, is advising former Labor Secretary Tom Perez -- who has called on party members to treat Trump as Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell treated Obama, opposing him at every turn -- in his bid for Democratic National Committee chairman.

Jimmy Dahman, a Clinton field organizer in Iowa and then Ohio, has launched TownHallProject.com -- where he and a team of volunteers have made a point of tracking every town hall, coffee meeting or other opportunity for constituents to reach their congressional delegation.

His site's database of upcoming meetings has served as a crucial tool for progressives to identify upcoming events to attend and protest.

Dahman decided to launch the volunteer-driven project after watching a crowd of 100 spontaneously show up at a town hall held by Rep. Mike Coffman, R-Colorado, to protest his support for repealing Obamacare.

"I thought, I wonder how many people feel the same way but didn't know the event exists," he said.

Former Clinton deputy national press secretary Jesse Ferguson, senior adviser Leslie Dach and communications department chief of staff Lori Lodes are all consulting for Protect Our Care, the coalition fighting Trump and congressional Republicans over the future of the Affordable Care Act.

Ferguson cited Clinton's oft-repeated Methodist creed -- "do all the good you can, for all the people you can, in all the ways you can, as long as ever you can."

"It's one that many of us took to heart," he said. "There's no better example for the idea that you get knocked down, you have to pick yourself back up. She taught us that and, for a lot of the staff, they're going to go and live that idea."David M. Smick is chairman and CEO of the macroeconomic advisory firm Johnson Smick International and founder and editor of the International Economy magazine. His new book is " The Great Equalizer: How Main Street Capitalism Can Create an Economy for Everyone ." The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) Facing fierce criticism from the right on fiscal policy, President Donald Trump has developed a new sense of urgency. In an interview last weekend with Fox's Bill O'Reilly, when asked if Americans should expect a tax cut this year, instead of saying something along the lines of "yes, absolutely," Trump offered the more restrained, "I think so ... before the end of the year. I would like to say yes."

Such an expression of caution is unusual for the 45th President. Yet Thursday, Trump suddenly shifted gears, promising to announce a "phenomenal" tax reform proposal in an amazingly short two to three weeks.

Reforming the tax code is likely to be far more politically complicated than the Trump officials, most of whom are new to Washington, think. As a congressional staff aide and later an outside adviser, I worked on both the 1981 and 1986 tax reform packages.

The process of seeking a consensus was difficult and time-consuming. In the case of the 1986 tax reform, it took years to resolve some serious differences. Trump will face a similar challenge in a much more compressed time period. Announcements are easy to make. Actually enacting tax reform is a lot more difficult.

The details of the President's plan have yet to be announced, but a rough outline exists. The outline largely reflects the House Republican tax reform plan. And the answer to two questions will likely determine the success of the overall effort:

First, will the Senate (and perhaps even some House Republicans) kill the House's proposal for a border adjustment tax (which produces an estimated $1.4 trillion in new revenue over 10 years, the amount roughly needed for Trump's infrastructure spending and military modernization)?

The new proposed border-adjusted tax system would place a 20% tax on imports while eliminating the corporate income tax. It is being heavily attacked by US importers, Walmart Koch Industries and foreign governments. Proponents argue that US companies, by not having to pay taxes on exports, would for the first time face a level playing field in tax policy relative to their global competition.

Second, will the Senate accept the House's use of "dynamic scoring" in determining the budget implications of tax reform? Dynamic scoring assumes tax incentives have some effect in creating greater tax revenue. Critics charge that dynamic scoring is "funny math." Proponents use the analogy of a small business. "If you expand your sales budget by $100,000, you wouldn't expect sales revenues to stay the same," they argue.

Here's why these questions are relevant: If dynamic scoring is accepted, tax reform will include the immediate expensing for tax purposes of all capital investment, a huge stimulus for business expansion. As one congressional leader told me, "If there is no dynamic scoring, expensing is out," because the static revenue loss (on paper) as a result of the stimulus would not comply with the 10-year budget restrictions previously set by Congress.

By the same token, if there is no border adjustment tax, the Trump fiscal stimulus is likely to be significantly smaller than originally envisioned. US tax policy will change, but there may be nothing "phenomenal" about the final result.

Making tax policymaking entails a series of trade-offs. If the choice is between a border adjustment tax versus Trump's reckless call for 35% or higher tariffs aimed at US trade competitors, the choice is clear.

Tariffs would risk a global trade war and almost certain worldwide recession. The border adjustment alternative would likely be consistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization and would not lead necessarily to trade retaliation. The US corporate tax system would not be dissimilar to the value-added tax systems used elsewhere in the world to the disadvantage of American companies.

But here's the ultimate question: Is the President's call for tariffs the opening bid in an elaborate effort to strike a deal on a border adjustment tax he wanted all along?

In other words, by threatening the world with tariffs, does the border adjustment tax (and its $1.4 trillion in new revenue) become the reasonable and safe alternative? Or is the new President not that clever? When all is said and done, one thing is certain about tax policy: All policy changes produce unintended economic and political consequences. That's why enacting a border adjustment tax is hardly a sure thing.

Finally, there is the issue of Trump's promise of individual tax rate reduction. Some of the administration's economic advisers have suggested the personal tax reductions be separated from the corporate tax stimulus, with the personal tax code to be addressed at a later time.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

Here's the problem: More than 80% of businesses in the United States use so-called "pass-throughs" to pay their taxes -- proprietorships, partnerships, Subchapter S organizations that all pay their taxes using the personal income tax schedules. Unless these firms are part of the corporate tax reform plan, small businesses and startups, which are already at a disadvantage relative to large corporations because of the complexity of the tax code, will fall further behind.

The upshot is that many Democrats in Congress are open to supporting a plan that reforms the inefficient corporate tax system. Few Democrats will support a plan for individual tax rate reduction. Here's the problem: Can a President who won by promising support for the Rust Belt's "forgotten man" really agree to a plan that delays tax rate cuts for the middle class and pushes fiscal stimulus for the corporate class?Havana, Cuba (CNN) As US President Donald Trump lashes out at US enemies and allies alike, many Cubans wonder which Trump they will face.

Will it be the businessman who said he wanted to open hotels on the communist-run island? Or will it will be the presidential candidate who, during his campaign, appealed to anti-Castro Cuban-Americans by promising to get tough on Cuba, even if that meant withdrawing the newly reopened US Embassy in Havana?

Friday, the White House indicated that a tougher posture could be in the works.

"We are in the midst of a full review of all US policies towards Cuba," White House spokesman Sean Spicer said at the daily media briefing. "The president is committed to an agenda of ensuring human rights for all citizens throughout the world and as we review those policies in Cuba, that will be forefront in those policy discussions."

Many Cubans seemed wary of increased sanctions and a return to frosty relations.

"We are watching him," said the Cuban street performer known as Pillo, who entertains tourists in Havana by outfitting his dachshund with a Trump-esque wig and training him to growl when he says the President's name.

"If Trump is tougher, he is going to find a tougher people here," Pillo said. "The people will resist him here and he will be just one more that goes into history. He should loosen the screws, like Obama did."

Changes after changes

Cubans are still absorbing the rapid changes to their island's relationship with their longtime Cold War-era adversary to the north that have occurred over the past two and a half years.

During his final term in office, President Barack Obama did more than the 10 US presidents that preceded him to change America's confrontational relationship with Havana.

Obama exchanged prisoners with the Cuban government, reestablished diplomatic relations with Havana and became the first US president since 1928 to visit Cuba.

As he left office, Obama said the new relationship with Cuba ranked high among his foreign policy successes.

"If I had told you that we would open up a new chapter with the Cuban people," Obama said during his final speech as president in January, "you might have said our sights were set a little too high."

But critics of the new policy said the opening to Cuba was unwarranted, as the Cuban government still represses internal dissent and blocks political reform.

"Our recent engagement with the government of Cuba was not accompanied by any significant concessions on human rights," Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said during his confirmation hearings. "We have not held them accountable for their conduct. Their leaders received much while their people received little. That serves neither the interest of Cubans or Americans."

During a 2016 campaign speech in Miami, Trump was even more blunt, threatening to remove the US Embassy in Havana if the Cuban government didn't meet his demands for "religious and political freedom for the Cuban people and the freeing of political prisoners."

"Fidel Castro's legacy is one of firing squads, theft, unimaginable suffering, poverty and the denial of fundamental human rights," Trump said in a statement after the former Cuban leader's death in November.

An uneasy wait

So far, Cuban officials have not responded to Trump's salvos, privately hoping that even if US-Cuban relations don't advance very much under Trump that at least he won't roll back the progress of the Obama years.

In January, Cuban President Raul Castro said his government wished "to pursue a respectful dialogue and cooperation on topics of common interest with the new government of President Donald Trump."

Until Trump makes the first move, though, Cubans and Americans who have invested in the island are waiting uneasily to see what will happen with the now-tenuous opening.

At his bustling Old Havana restaurant El Caf茅, Cuban businessman Nelson Rodriguez Tamayo looked nervously at the crowd of US visitors who packed his small establishment, one of the few that serves all-day breakfast.

"I get many, many Americans who come here," said Rodriguez, who returned to Cuba from living in London to take advantage of the changes on the island.

The United States and Cuba "should have a good relationship," Rodriguez said. "They can make business together, fair business. I think it should continue, but I don't know what will happen with the new president."

Cuban officials say that in 2016, visitors from the United States totaled 614,433, a 34% increase from the previous year. But if Trump retightened restrictions on Americans visiting the island, the boom would likely dry up.

Business concerns

US companies that have just entered the Cuban market are also concerned.

"We can't speculate what will happen in the future," said Galo Beltran, American Airlines' representative in Cuba during the inauguration of the carrier's office in Havana on Wednesday.

Last year, US airlines received permission to restart flights from the United States to Cuba for the first time in more than half a century. American will fly to at least six destinations on the island and employ a local staff of about 30, Beltran said.

But with Trump in the White House, it's unclear if US companies once again will face increased restrictions on investing in Cuba.

"Our efforts will continue to be to go full steam ahead," Beltran said, "in making sure our presence and our contributions will be maximized by bringing as much traffic as we can compliantly."

In the meantime, many on both sides of the Florida Strait are anxious to to see what Trump Cuba's policy will be.

"There's a lot to do and there may be different ways to do it that are worth discussing, but we need to move forwards, not backwards," said US attorney Scott Gilbert, who was involved in the secret negotiations that freed State Department contractor Alan Gross from prison in Cuba and led to restored diplomatic relations.

"It would be tragic to lose the ground that we've covered," he said.White, Working Class and Worried is a CNN partnership with the Kaiser Family Foundation -- an extensive survey of white, working-class Americans and voters, who form a backbone of the support for Donald Trump. Watch Anderson Cooper 360 and CNN.com for reports throughout the week.

About the survey

The CNN/KFF Poll was conducted by telephone August 9-September 5 among 1,614 adults, including 701 who were identified as working-class whites -- white non-Hispanic adults who do not hold a four-year degree and, if under age 25, are not currently enrolled in school. Results for all working-class white voters have a margin of sampling error of +/-5 percentage points; it is 6 points for results among white working-class voters who support Trump. Full poll resultsChat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Story highlights Trump spoke to Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari about fighting terrorism

He also chatted with President Jacob Zuma about strengthening ties with South Africa

(CNN) President Donald Trump has been increasingly chatting with other world leaders during his first weeks in office. On Monday he turned his attention to Africa.

Trump spent Monday morning calling two of the continent's most prominent leaders, Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari and South African President Jacob Zuma, to discuss combating terrorism, trade relations and other issues.

According to Buhari's aide, Femi Adesina, Trump assured the Nigerian president that the US is ready to help obtain "a new deal in helping Nigeria in terms of military weapons to combat terrorism."

In a statement to CNN, Adesina also said, "President Trump encouraged President Buhari to keep up the good work he is doing, and also commended him for the efforts made in rescuing 24 of the Chibok Girls and the strides being taken by the Nigerian military."

In 2014 nearly 300 girls were kidnapped from a boarding school in Chibok by terror group Boko Haram. Most remain missing, although the terror group released a group of them last October in a deal brokered in part by Nigerian authorities.

Read MorePresident Trump is probably saying: "TGIF."

Headlines claim the White House is in "chaos" after an extremely turbulent week. But there's one big thing going right for Trump right now: The U.S. economy.

A slew of economic data came out this week. Almost all of it was positive. Americans are still going to stores and spending big (retail sales came in better than expected for January). They're also buying houses. And cars. And using their credit cards.

On top of that, small and medium-sized business owners are giddy. The NFIB Small Business Optimism Index is at its highest level since 2004.

Heck, even manufacturing has made a pretty big turnaround and looks almost healthy again. The Philly Fed Index, a survey on how well manufacturers are doing, just hit its highest level since 1984. And anyone with money in the market likely noticed the U.S. stock market set even more records this week. In fact, American stocks are on their best winning streak in 25 years.

There's still a belief on Wall Street -- and many parts of Main Street that CNNMoney has recently visited -- that Trump is going to get the economy surging again. Yes, there are some red flags -- household debt is back at 2008 levels and prices are rising. But overall, things look good.

"The economy is better than you think," says Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank in New York. "President Trump inherited the best economy since President Bush, so let's hope things continue to run smoothly."

Related: Trump rally is best for new POTUS since LBJ and JFK

The bullish scenario: Trump gets back on track

But the reason consumers and CEOs are so excited is because they expect Trump to get going on his "pro-growth agenda." Business leaders -- big and small -- want tax cuts, not lengthy press conferences hammering the press and his former rival Hillary Clinton.

As a Trump supporter in Kentucky told CNNMoney recently, "He already won the election. Just shut up about the votes."

Business CEOs have been clear: They want lower taxes, infrastructure spending and some regulations scaled back (or just not as strictly enforced).

Trump voters have also been clear: They want jobs, jobs, jobs that pay more than minimum wage.

The question is whether Trump can get back on track to focus on these issues with Congress. If he does that, a lot of the "chaos" of his first weeks in office will likely fade.

"The bullish scenario is that Trump comes to realize quickly that he must use most of his political capital to fast-track tax cuts, tax reform, repatriated earnings, and deregulation," wrote economist Ed Yardeni of Yardeni Research in a note this week.

Yardeni went on to say, "If that path lifts economic growth, as it should, the strength of the economy should boost Trump's political capital and strength -- both at home and abroad."

Even one of Trump's biggest critics -- billionaire mogul Mark Cuban -- tweeted some praise Friday of the president's economic plans: "Trump is trying to do some things right. Taxes, lobbyists, bureaucracy, FCC, SEC. If he can get the changes passed, they are positives."

Related: Trump isn't killing the bull market. Here's why

Trump's 'Game of Thrones' could hurt economy

But the biggest threat to this bullish scenario unfolding is probably Trump himself. He has turned Washington into a "Game of Thrones" right now, argues Yardeni.

One Republican lawmaker put it even more bluntly to CNN Thursday after listening to Trump's wild 75-minute press conference: "We're just trying to manage this s***."

The more time Trump spends fighting with the media or having to stabilize his cabinet, especially the role of National Security Adviser, the less time he is spending on the economy.

At some point, stocks will do a big U-turn if Wall Street doesn't think Trump and Congress will come through on his economic agenda. Optimism can also reverse quickly, stalling spending and growth.

If the president fails to deliver a better economy, it may be the biggest let down of all to many of his supporters.Alan Judd is a novelist and biographer who worked in the British Foreign Office and is the authorized biographer of the founder of MI6. The opinions in this commentary are his own.

(CNN) Look away for a moment from the sparks flying from the big question of the day -- what General Flynn did or didn't say to the Russian ambassador , who knew what and when, who leaked, who else might be involved -- and consider how the new administration has got itself into this position . And how it might get itself out of it.

President Trump's current antagonistic stance towards his intelligence and security agencies dates, we all recall, from before his election , when he characterized them as part of the smug, Democrat-inclined Washington establishment that he aimed to overturn.

At the same time they -- the FBI in this case -- were in hot water with the Democrats for supposedly breaking rules by going public on investigations into Hillary Clinton's insecure emails. Intelligence is like sex when it gets mixed up with domestic politics: everyone takes sides and, in the end, all parties suffer. There are no winners.

Since taking office, President Trump has maintained his hostile attitude, despite appointing such people as Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and CIA Director Mike Pompeo who know what they're about and are getting on and doing it.

Policy with regard to Russia has become the toxic issue dividing the President -- in his own perception -- from an intelligence establishment that he sees as still mired in Cold War thinking and out to sabotage him and his government. He thinks he has nothing to learn from them.

He should think again and talk to them.

He should start by asking himself what intelligence agencies are for. In both the US and the UK systems, they exist primarily to bring truth to power, to tell governments not what they want to hear, but what they need to know about threats at home and abroad.

They may influence policy, but they don't determine it -- if the President seeks a more conciliatory policy towards Russia, then it is for him to bring it about. The intelligence agencies may not like it, but they are staffed by loyal government servants who will go along with it because their duty is to the government of the day.

At the same time, they will not hesitate to warn him of pitfalls: when the Russians are deceiving him, for instance, or when they have a concealed agenda, or when they have understood something differently to how he has understood it. That is their job and his job will be a lot easier if he embraces them, rather than chucks stones at their windows. For if he does embrace them, he would be the first to be told of any wrong-doing by his supporters and would have time to react before it leaks -- as in Washington nearly everything does, eventually.

In Britain, during the Second World War, Prime Minister Churchill had very frequent private meetings -- often while he was still in bed -- with the Chief of MI6 (Britain's CIA equivalent), which meant that he saw the latest intelligence before it came up to him through the system.

As a result, he was often better informed than his chiefs of staff.

After the war, Churchill's Labour Party successor, Clement Attlee, saw the head of MI5 (FBI equivalent) more frequently than any Prime Minister before or since. One of the main reasons was that the Prime Minister wanted to be told about members of his party who were spies or secret communists -- bad news for him, but it meant he could take pre-emptive action. He could be confident that the Leader of the Opposition -- Churchill by then -- would be told only about wrongdoers within his own party.

This is the kind of relationship President Trump could achieve with his agencies if he were prepared to follow normal procedures and encourage them to bring him the bad news in confidence. This is why he should talk to them directly, rather than via Twitter.

As for the leaks in question, does the President actually know where they came from? They could have come from within the agencies themselves, although they have a pretty good record for discretion where intercepts are concerned. They could have come from someone among those to whom they report -- their official and political customers.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

If the President were to embrace his agencies, however, he -- and they -- should take care not to get too close. Once he discovered what they could tell him and do for him, the temptation to misuse them for his own political ends would be considerable -- an equal danger to both parties. Or he might be tempted to brag about what he knows, thereby compromising their sources.

Either way, whether embracing those who are there to help him or keeping them at a distance, President Trump would do well to adapt the wise words of one of his distinguished predecessors: talk quietly and listen long. And don't threaten the big stick.(CNN) Of all the diplomatic clouds hanging over President Donald Trump's White House, the darkest and most malevolent is Russia . Yet since he came to office, the gaping hole in Trump's foreign policy pronouncements has been on exactly this subject.

While there has been almost radio silence on Russia,Trump has had time to reverse course on China, now accepting its "One China" policy. On Iran, Trump took little time putting the theocracy "on notice" for unspecified retaliation, should it threaten the interests of the US or its allies.

But his plans for Russia remain an enigma wrapped in layers of potential personal and business controversy. The the omission is all the more glaring as Trump has previously implied that Putin is central to his much-vaunted aim to destroy ISIS and make Americans safe.

Trump's vacillation between professed admiration for Putin, to claims that he doesn't know the man, to saying that "If Putin likes Trump ... that's called an asset," leaves not just Americans wondering what he plans for the future of the US-Russia relationship, but the Kremlin also.

In recent days, sources in Moscow have complained of disarray at the US State Department, claiming that they don't know who is in charge of what and whom they should speak to about key issues.

Now, a key member of the Trump administration resigns because of a scandal that centers on the revelation that he discussed US sanctions on Russia with the Russian ambassador. No wonder Moscow is confused. Russia has denied that Flynn and the ambassador discussed sanctions, despite Flynn's resignation.

Some of these concerns might have begun to be laid to rest this week, as Trump's "A Team" of Vice President Mike Pence, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Secretary of Defense James Mattis fly to Europe for a series of key meetings.

But with Flynn's departure hanging in the air, the President may feel under-represented on any future talks with Russia.

Russia currently sits at the center of a number of the crises facing the world. In Syria, it outmaneuvered Obama to become the central player in brokering any kind of peace deal. In Europe, the Russian intervention in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea in 2014 triggered a chain of events that has reached near boiling point, with more and more NATO troops deploying to Eastern Europe. All of this is happening at a time when many are questioning the future of NATO -- something that plays to Putin's desires: witness his eagerness to draw NATO and US ally Turkey to his side in the Syria conflict.

JUST WATCHED Michael Flynn in 60 seconds Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Michael Flynn in 60 seconds 01:00

Trump is potentially the friendliest US President Russia is likely to find in a long time. But shorn of a national security adviser who once sat next to Putin at dinner and was paid to appear on pro-Kremlin media, the Kremlin may wonder if it's really worth waiting for Trump. Only weeks ago when Obama expelled several dozen Russian diplomats, the Kremlin held its nerve and didn't resort to the normal diplomatic tit-for-tat expulsions.

Pence, Tillerson and Mattis leave behind them a chaotic, Tim Burton-esque Camelot: a king who tried to run before he could walk and graceless courtiers who make a mockery of themselves, their roles and the monarch. Add to those handicaps an unpopular press secretary who says things that are proven to be untrue; a dissembling adviser with no facts and little grip on the truth; a senior adviser utterly lacking in humility whose propensity for alternate facts defies logic; and last but by no means least, Flynn, whose tenure as national security adviser is the shortest on record and whose own alternate facts cost him his job.

Pence, Tillerson and Mattis must now explain the madness of Trump's first month to reassure some of the US's most important allies that the country is not totally out of control.

If they fail to do that over the next few days with meetings in Bonn, Brussels and Munich, they risk a sterile relationship with some of America's oldest allies.

Europe, without doubt, is experiencing its own annus horribilis, Brexit, insurgent populists in Trump's mold and, to cap it all, a financial crisis in the south.

But despite all of these pressing issues, somewhere near top of the agenda will be how best to tame the Russian Bear: are Europe and the US ready to jump in the cage along side it, or should they leave the bear in the cage and keep it at a safe distance.

The Russians are the most in need of all those waiting to see Trump's Three Horsemen. Putin wants to be respected as a global power player. He wants suzerainty in Syria, forgiveness for invading Ukraine, and increasingly -- along with his ally Iran -- to set the agenda in the Arab world.

Where Trump is on any of this is the biggest conundrum; where he is without Flynn, who appears at the very least to have been a primary channel to Russia, is even more of a mystery.

JUST WATCHED Flynn: One of the greatest presidencies Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Flynn: One of the greatest presidencies 02:57

The Kremlin says that the pair still plan to meet, but to discuss what is unclear. Can Trump really make an ally of Putin over killing off of ISIS, and simultaneously reduce Russia's strategic weapons arsenals, as has been suggested?

It is possible that Russia will now see what the rest of the world appears to be slowly waking up to now: that wiser hands in the form of Tillerson and Mattis are taking up their administration posts and slowly shifting Trump away from his Russian embrace.

Mattis and Tillerson have both been critical of Russia. Trump's ambassador to the UN, Nikki Haley, has raised the bar on Europe's sanctions on Russia, saying it must not only comply with the Minsk agreement, but get out of Crimea if it wants the US to lift sanctions too.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

It's little wonder, then, that the Kremlin wants clarity and no surprise that they'll be keener than ever for a face-to-face chat with the President. How else will they remind the President of their importance in solving many of the problems facing him?

But here's the rub: as European leaders will likely appeal to the US delegation to isolate Russia for the sake of European stability, the fact remains that Russia has successfully placed itself at the center of many of the greatest problems facing the planet.

Time is running out and Trump needs to make a decision about that bear and his cage.President Donald Trump made his most extensive attack on the media since taking office Thursday while seeking to defend his administration from critical coverage.

In a press conference that lasted more than an hour, Trump repeatedly accused journalists of being hostile and dishonest in their reporting on his first month in office.

"The press has become so dishonest that if we don't talk about, we are doing a tremendous disservice to the American people. Tremendous disservice," Trump said. "We have to talk to find out what's going on, because the press honestly is out of control. The level of dishonesty is out of control."

"I turn on the T.V., open the newspapers and I see stories of chaos. Chaos," he said. "Yet it is the exact opposite. This administration is running like a fine- tuned machine, despite the fact that I can't get my cabinet approved."

The press conference, which was nominally intended to announced Trump's pick for labor secretary, was the president's idea. A senior administration official told CNN that Trump walked into the Oval Office Thursday morning and told his top aides: "Let's do a press conference today."

Related: An amazing moment in history: Donald Trump's press conference

During his remarks, Trump made several statements about the media that were either untrue or misleading. He claimed reporters at The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal did not reach out to him before writing certain stories. Both stories he cited note that the reporters tried to get comment from the White House.

The president also called recent stories about his campaign advisers' communications with Russia "fake news" and repeatedly said the New York Times was "failing."

"Russia is fake news," the president said. He went on to say "I've never seen more dishonest media than, frankly, the political media."

At one point, Trump was asked how the stories he condemned as "fake news" could in fact be fake if they were based on leaks he was slamming as illegal.

"Well the leaks are real," he said. "You're the one that wrote about them and reported them, I mean the leaks are real. You know what they said, you saw it and the leaks are absolutely real. The news is fake because so much of the news is fake."

In a lengthy exchange with CNN's Jim Acosta, Trump said he wanted to "turn in CNN for not doing a good job," and that the reporting "is fake." He also claimed he no longer watches CNN, but complained about what he sees when he watches the network.

Trump also complained about the tone of the media's coverage: "The tone is such hatred," he told Acosta. "I'm really not a bad person, by the way. No, but the tone is such -- I do get good ratings; you have to admit that. The tone is such hatred."

He then went on to promote one news show -- "Fox & Friends," the Fox News morning show on which he used to have a regular interview slot and which has been largely favorable to Trump since he was elected -- as an example of honest news.

"I have to say, "Fox & Friends" in the morning, they're very honorable people," he said. "They're very -- not because they're good, because they hit me also when I do something wrong. But they have the most honest morning show. That's all I can say. It's the most honest."

The bulk of Trump's remarks centered on defending his performance as president. "I inherited a mess," Trump said three times before listing his achievements, including pledges from companies to hire more American workers.

"Unfortunately, much of the media in Washington, D.C., along with New York, Los Angeles in particular, speaks not for the people, but for the special interests and for those profiting off a very, very obviously broken system," Trump said.

The president had been criticized recently for ignoring questioners from the mainstream media when holding his news conferences with foreign leaders. On Thursday, he took questions from more than a dozen reporters with mainstream outlets, including NPR, NBC, ABC, CBS and CNN, among others.

At one point, Trump even suggested that he would like to have a better relationship with the press, but said he could not do so so long as the coverage was "fake."

"I can handle a bad story better than anybody, as long as it's true," the president said. "But I'm not OK when it's fake."

Trump also specifically attacked leaks to the press, and outlets who run information based on leaks.

"How does the press get this information that's classified? How do they do it?" he asked. "[I]t's an illegal process and the press should be ashamed of themselves. But more importantly, the people that gave out the information to the press should be ashamed of themselves, really ashamed."Career officials at the agencies most involved in the process, however, are set to recommend a fenceone that will cover only about half the length, CNN has learned.

CNN spoke to more than two dozen sources and experts, including some who are part of high level discussions with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).

While no plan has been approved or finalized, DHS is currently working on recommendations that Secretary John Kelly will present to Trump.

President Trump has been looking at various blueprints with his advisers, a senior administration official told CNN. He could ultimately insist on a concrete wall stretching across the entire border, as he has promised. It would be a far bigger and a vastly more expensive project, and any plan would need to be sent to Congress for funding approval.

JUST WATCHED What history tells us about Trump's wall Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What history tells us about Trump's wall 01:22

A preliminary internal report by U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), viewed by CNN, outlines various options in phases and uses the words "fence" and "wall/fence."

It also includes a final phase calling for covering more than 1,080 additional miles of border with new barriers which would stretch from coast to coast, with a price tag of $21.6 billion. But sources called that option "only fantasy," and said it is not being seriously considered by officials close to the discussions within the Department of Homeland Security.

Other phases or proposals in the internal report were far more modest, and cheaper.

One senior U.S. Border Patrol official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, told CNN that it's crucial to be able to see through a border barrier. "I'm not calling it a wall because we are talking about a fence that we can look through. That's what we need."

Another senior U.S. Border Patrol official told CNN, "I think fencing has worked for us in the past, but you never want to have a barrier in place that will obstruct your vision, that prevents you from seeing the other side of the border."

Any White House push for a full-length concrete wall would receive little support from career officials within CBP, according to Seth Stodder, a former DHS official who focused on border security under the Obama and Bush administrations. "These are law enforcement agencies. When the White House says 'Jump,' they will say 'How high?' But there will be whispers from them to Congress saying not to do this," Stodder told CNN.

Some sources told CNN one of the biggest challenges will be convincing the president to modify his campaign promise of a solid wall structure. "It's going to be made of hardened concrete, and it's going to be made out of rebar, and steel," Trump said at a December 2015 rally. He repeated the assertion most recently at a news conference in January of this year when he shot back at a reporter who asked him about the fence: "On the fenceit's not a fence. It's a wall. You just misreported it. We're going to build a wall."

Sources tell CNN Trump's vision of a concrete wall is unrealistic, because of cost, timing, and safety.

As one official put it: After the experts convince Trump the wall will not work and it will be a fence, "the White House will just have to figure out a way to spin it [to the public.]"

A concrete wall also poses environmental problems, such as flood risks and hazards for endangered species.

Leading plan

One plan being seriously considered by U.S. Customs and Border Protection, according to sources, calls for upgrading significant portions of the 654 miles of fencing that is currently along the border, as well as the construction of new fencing along key areas.

That option would include about 150 miles of new fence in areas still to be determined, along with about 15 new miles of fencing around San Diego and El Paso, and another 12 new miles around the Rio Grande Valley, which includes Brownsville, Texas. The plan also calls for 272 miles of replacement fencing.

The total area of border covered by fencing under this plan would be about 831 miles, which includes fencing already there now. Under that plan the total barrier between the United States and Mexico would then cover about 831 total miles of a nearly 2000 mile border, still not even half, according to sources.

The new and replaced fencing would cost about $5 billion.

Fence along the U.S.-Mexico border in Brownsville, Texas.

The new fencing would resemble some of the strong fortifications built around the Brownsville, Nogales and San Diego areas. They're called "bollard-style," or "PV1," or "Normandy-style," and essentially involve thick reinforced bars or slats of steel that stand about 18 feet tall, often 6-by-6 inches wide and filled with rebar and concrete for strength, and typically set 6 feet below the ground to prevent tunneling under them.

While the sources did not all agree on the precise length or location of new fencing, all told CNN that protecting the border will require more hi-tech surveillance and more arrests. And all but one of the more than two dozen sources CNN talked to agreed that a concrete wall is not a good idea.

Many officials stressed the need for more border agents, with one saying, "Technology and fencing can only play a part. Personnel have to be in place to respond."

At a House Committee on Homeland Security hearing last week , Secretary Kelly joined several other witnesses who all said that fencing often provides more security to border agents and appeared to back off from using the word "wall."

When asked by Rep. Filemon Vela, a Democrat from Texas, whether "President Trump's promise to build a 2000-mile big beautiful wall" was "a viable option," Secretary Kelly replied, "The President, Congressman, has asked me to take a look at what we need at the Southwest Border and come up with recommendation to him. Yes, there are many places that we need some types of physical barrier right now backed up by men and women at the border protection."

The White House also seems to have given itself some wiggle room in its official definition of the wall. President Trump's executive order on the border wall reads, "It is the policy of the executive branch to secure the southern border of the United States through the immediate construction of a physical wall on the southern border, monitored and supported by adequate personnel so as to prevent illegal immigration, drug and human trafficking, and acts of terrorism."

The order goes on to specify later that "'Wall' shall mean a contiguous, physical wall or other simeilarly secure, contiguous, and impassable physical barrier."

Miami developer Jorge Perez, who has worked with Trump for years, received an email from the Trump Organization with a note from the president himself asking him to get involved with the border project. CNN viewed the email on the condition that it not be shown. It contained sketches of two walls, a primary wall and a secondary wall, with a security road in between. Perez, a Democrat, said he's not going to be involved in the border project.(CNN) This time last year, CNN Opinion asked a group of commentators from around the world for their take on the US presidential election. One year later, Donald Trump is preparing to be sworn in as President of the United States. So, what is the world expecting -- and hoping for -- from a Trump presidency? Guest commentators from around the world weigh in. The views expressed are their own.

Russia: A domestic win for Putin

When Donald Trump was declared the winner of the 2016 presidential election, he received a round of applause in the Russian parliament. It was a pure, almost childish expression of joy.

Since then, the "Russian factor" has loomed ominously over Trump's impending presidency. The Russian term " kompromat " -- compromising material -- is entering the English language, much like "sputnik" did more than 50 years ago. The American press debates -- in total seriousness -- whether the Kremlin is literally keeping the President of the most powerful country on Earth on its leash and shaping his policies. More importantly, the notorious hacking story is far from over. For many in Washington, Vladimir Putin has become the main trickster of the election.

However, Russian officialdom was hardly expecting a Trump victory. Viewing the American election as a zero-sum game with the West, Putin planned for a likely defeat. Before Election Day, Russia's propaganda machine was warming up to announce that a flawed American political system would never let the anti-establishment candidate win. That was supposed to be Russia's consolation prize.

Then, defeat suddenly turned into victory. Russia is beyond satisfied with this serendipitous turn of events. A happy and astounded Kremlin will now try to get the most from Trump -- from easing sanctions to making a deal on Syria and settling the Ukraine issue.

It is difficult, of course, to predict how Trump's administration will address these issues and what the result will be. But this uncertainty hardly undermines the feeling that Russian officialdom has been experiencing: a sense they have achieved a moral victory over the West and its values.

Since the annexation of Crimea, the West has labeled Putin a pariah and a global threat. Yet now, Trump's win has made something clear: It is not Putin who is a weak outlier before the world's liberal order. Rather, it is the West that is divided and full of resentment. An outcast yesterday, Putin may now see himself as a major power broker in the emerging global Trumpworld.

The least that the Kremlin will now expect from the White House is a display of respect and equality. After what has been presented by Russian propaganda as years of unprecedented humiliation and offense from the West, Putin will easily sell his country's newfound parity with the United States to the Russian public for his own personal gain.

Transforming Putin's moral triumph into a dramatic expansion of Russian influence on the global stage will be trickier. But from the Kremlin's point of view, it is probably doable.

Mikhail Fishman is editor-in-chief of The Moscow Times.

Mexico: Will Trump really pursue his 'Mexican agenda'?

Ana Maria Salazar

Throughout his campaign, we all hoped he would tone down such rhetoric so as not to alienate the Hispanic vote (too much, at least). However, his rhetoric simply became more vitriolic -- and more threatening.

So President Enrique Pe帽a Nieto invited him to Mexico , perhaps in hopes that the hospitality and reality of bilateral relations would change Donald Trump麓s opinion about the southern border (and awkward facts such as there being potentially millions of jobs at stake -- on both sides of the border -- if he decided to scrap NAFTA).

But mere hours after returning from Mexico, not only did Trump NOT change his mind, but he engaged ( in Arizona of all places ) in some of his most anti-immigration rhetoric yet. Meanwhile, in Mexico there was a backlash against Pe帽a Nieto's decision to invite Trump, forcing Finance Minister Luis Videgaray -- seen as instrumental in arranging the visit -- out of the Cabinet.

As the votes were tallied on election night, there was hope that Trump's rhetoric was campaign garbage and not genuine policy. But in the two months since the election, Trump has reiterated his calls for a wall, insisted that Mexico will reimburse the US for the cost and called for the renegotiation of NAFTA and a border tax for companies that invest in Mexico and wish to send their products to the United States.

On the back of all this, the Mexican peso has plunged, and there is concern that on January 20, the least popular person in decades to be sworn in as US President will deliver a speech that could be catastrophic for the Mexican economy.

Since losing his role at the finance ministry, Luis Videgaray has been appointed foreign minister, and will head negotiations with the United States. Perhaps the President is hoping that Trump will now play and negotiate in an appropriate way. He likely is wrong.

Through his threats, tweets, and speeches, Trump may have left the President and his negotiators with no political wiggle room to sign any kind of agreement that requires ratification by the Mexican Senate. And the chances for a candidate from Pe帽a Nieto's party will likely be scuppered in the 2018 presidential elections unless the President can convince Trump not to initiate massive deportations and to stop insisting on building the wall.

But if Trump believes his "Mexican agenda" helped get him elected, it is hard to imagine he will do anything but continue to insist on his beautiful wall, deportations and a new and "improved" NAFTA agreement.

Ana Maria Salazar worked at the White House as policy adviser for President Bill Clinton's special envoy for the Americas and was deputy assistant secretary of defense for drug enforcement. She writes, teaches and has anchored radio and TV news programs in Mexico since 2001.

Israel: Netanyahu breathes a sigh of relief

Yaakov Katz

After eight years of hostility and tension with President Barack Obama, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu will let out a huge sigh of relief Friday when Donald Trump is sworn in as the 45th president of the United States.

For Netanyahu and his right-wing coalition government, Trump's presidency is viewed as a new beginning when it comes to Israeli-US relations. One government minister went so far as to say that Trump's victory in November signals that "the days of the Messiah" have come.

That might be a stretch, but for Israel, Trump seems like the antithesis of the outgoing president.

While Obama regularly pressured Israel to stop construction in Jewish settlements in the West Bank, Trump's advisers have said they will not. While Obama refused to move the US Embassy to Jerusalem, Trump has said that he will . And while Obama championed the Iran deal that Israel aggressively tried to prevent, Trump has raised the possibility that he will scrap it.

While this all bodes well for the current government in Jerusalem, it remains to be seen what Trump will do when it comes to Israel's ongoing conflict with the Palestinians. Will he follow the longstanding US policy of pushing for a two-state solution or will he offer new options for a resolution?

Will he stand strong against settlement expansion or will he allow Israeli annexation of settlements as some government ministers are advocating?

So far, Trump hasn't said much, although the announcement that his son-in-law Jared Kushner will serve as the president's Middle East envoy seems to indicate that he plans to take on the thorny issue.

Like other countries in the Middle East, Israel is hoping to see a more engaged America playing an active role in the region. The presence of Russian military forces in Syria, for example, is believed to be directly linked to Obama's decision not to enforce his "red line" on the use of chemical weapons in that ongoing civil war and humanitarian disaster. Leaving a vacuum allowed Russia to enter the country.

Will Trump re-engage the Middle East or will he prefer to remain on the sidelines and stay away from a region that has for decades frustrated consecutive American presidents?

Starting on January 20, the world will begin to get some answers.

India: Did America get its Modi?

Sanjay Kumar

On the eve of the inauguration of Donald Trump, India is experiencing some of the same kind of anxiety it felt when Narendra Modi was about to become the country's prime minister, back in May 2014

A right-wing Hindu leader with a controversial political past who cultivated an image as an outsider, Modi's rise to power disturbed the existing political equilibrium in the country, and his election brought with it a heightened sense of unpredictability and uncertainty among not just Indians, but overseas as well. Indeed, for many -- particularly the country's liberals -- it took quite some time for the reality of a Modi premiership to sink in.

A sense of disbelief and uncertainty has gripped many people here again.

Will the improvement in India-US relations continue with a Trump administration? How will Indians settled and working in the United States be treated? Will the protectionist measures that Trump is talking about impact Indians living abroad? Will such policies affect the outsourcing that keeps so many Indians in India working?

These are just some of the questions Indians have. But the questions also extend to international affairs -- how is India going to adjust if Washington decides to revise Obama's policy towards the Middle East and western Asia? Policymakers in New Delhi are already worried, for example, that reimposing sanctions on Iran would impact India's crude oil supply and delay the completion of Chabahar port that will create a new trade route for Afghanistan and drastically alter the trade dynamics in South Asia.

In addition, New Delhi is also keenly waiting to see how Trump goes about dealing with Pakistan. Will he continue the old policy of transactional engagement with the Muslim state or take a firm line over its support for terror groups?

But there is a more philosophical concern among liberals in India: The potential impact of a close political entente between Modi and Trump. The fear is that the political proximity between the two leaders, who have strong anti-Muslim, anti-minority images, will unleash and strengthen forces inimical to liberal and secular values. Such sentiment is already simmering in India since Modi assumed office in 2014 -- and his presence has contributed to keeping the Indo-Pakistan relationship on tenterhooks.

Many on the Indian subcontinent see Trump as Modi's alter ego. Closer ties between them might prove to be a double-edged sword for our country.

Sanjay Kumar is a New Delhi-based journalist who writes on national and international issues with particular emphasis on South Asia.

Britain: Trump creates a stir

On Monday, the British people learned that Donald Trump's late mother was an admirer of the British monarchy. "She loved the ceremonial and the beauty, 'cause nobody does that like the English," he told an interviewer

A family weakness for the British nostalgia industry is unlikely to have much impact on his approval rating among a population deeply concerned about the President-elect's ethics, prejudices and mental stability.

What did get the UK talking was the identity of the interviewer. Michael Gove, who recently left the British Cabinet after losing a leadership election, has returned to his role as a columnist for The Times of London. He remains a prominent figure in Westminster politics and has retained his seat in the House of Commons.

Meeting with Trump in his capacity as a journalist, Gove is only the latest right-wing figure to irk the British government by flaunting a relationship with the President-elect outside official channels. Prime Minister Theresa May, who clashed frequently with Gove when they were Cabinet colleagues under David Cameron, has made clear that such freelance diplomacy will not hasten his political rehabilitation.

Even Gove, however, failed to match the stir created when the President-elect was pictured with Nigel Farage, the former leader of the UK Independence Party, before he had met representatives of the governing Conservative Party.

When Trump then suggested on Twitter that Farage should be appointed ambassador to Washington, May was furious. In Britain, where ambassadorships are traditionally held by long-serving career diplomats, this was seen as unprecedented interference in the affairs of Her Majesty's Government. The Queen nominally appoints each ambassador and takes a close interest due to her contacts with other heads of state. If Trump shares his mother's fondness for the Queen's ceremonial role in British life, he would be well advised to respect her protocol.

As well as securing a scoop for The Times, Gove's main aim in meeting the President-elect will likely have been to impress on him the existence of prominent Brexiteers other than Nigel Farage. Farage has enjoyed high visibility on British TV, his divisive rhetoric delivering strong ratings. Unlike Trump, he has not succeeded in translating that into electoral success, having failed at seven attempts to win a seat in Parliament . He was excluded by the official "Vote Leave" campaign in the UK referendum, run by more mainstream members of the Conservative Party, and campaigned instead with a smaller, unregistered "Leave EU" team dominated by UKIP. The anti-European movement in Britain is riddled with personal divisions; Gove, who played a major role in "Vote Leave", will have bridled at Farage taking credit for the referendum.

None of these subtleties are likely to deter the British government from maintaining a formal alliance with the United States as long as it remains a world power. But the President-elect would be wise to avoid playing favorites with squabbling British politicians. Serious concerns remain about the future of the relationship with Britain; elements in the security services are concerned about the legal implications for the " Five-Eyes " intelligence sharing system should Trump authorize the use of torture by their American partners. In Scotland, he has long been an unpopular landlord, indulging in an ongoing feud with the ruling Scottish National Party over environmental and planning issues.

Diplomacy by Twitter is not the British way. The Queen would not approve.

Kate Maltby is a theater critic for The Times of London and regular broadcaster and columnist in the United Kingdom on issues of culture and politics. Her website is www.katemaltby.com

Germany: Will Merkel confront Trump?

Almut M枚ller

From a Berlin perspective, there is a particular irony in the inauguration of Donald Trump as the next US president. Today's Germany in many ways is a product of the post-World War II era in Europe on which the United States has spent so much time and resources over the past decades.

Locking Germany into a collective European order has been key to pacifying the European continent, and has served Germany particularly well. Indeed, the principles that are so strongly rooted in this country are largely tied to the pacifist attitudes of the German public and a preference for an economic rather than a security role in foreign affairs. There is also a strong reflexive support among Germans for multilateral approaches aimed at building global institutions and international law, as well as for the need for Germany to have a predictable foreign policy.

But what Berlin has understood from the President-elect so far is that Donald Trump is not really very interested in any of these principles. Instead, his rhetoric runs counter to some of the most formative instincts of the political elite in Germany -- and of the public at large. The question Germans have now is how Berlin will react once President Trump actually starts to shape politics rather than talking about it?

And there has been plenty in the talk so far to cause concern. For example, just last weekend, Trump gave a major interview with widely read German newspaper BILD Zeitung in which he called into question the role of NATO and the future cohesion of the European Union. Both institutions are fundamental pillars of German foreign policy.

Angela Merkel gave a first glimpse of her mindset in a news conference with the prime minister of New Zealand in Berlin that same day. "I think we Europeans have our fate in our own hands," she said when asked about Trump's comments. By her usually cautious standards this was another remarkable statement following her initial reaction to Trump's election back in November.

When President Barack Obama gave a speech at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin in the summer of 2013 , he called for an end to German complacency in international affairs. Developments in and around Europe over recent years have already seen a much more active Germany on the European and international stage. Berlin has understood that some of its vital interests -- both in economic and security terms -- have come to be challenged.

Trump is going to ensure Germany accelerates along this path, a reality that will have major implications for Germany and Europe. Berlin has a realistic understanding of its power, and where the German government has the resources to punch its weight it will attempt to do so.

But how willing will Germany be to confront President Trump on fundamental questions over the future of the European and global order? Germany currently holds the G20 presidency. That might give us a sign about how much Merkel is willing to say.

Almut M枚ller is a senior policy fellow and director of the European Council on Foreign Relations' Berlin office.

China: Trump should avoid the Taiwan card

Shen Dingli

While the uncertainty surrounding Donald Trump's incoming administration doesn't bode well for anyone, the instability ahead could begin to recede if the new executive branch is willing to learn and acts sensibly.

For instance, Trump has repeatedly demanded "fair trade". No one rejects the idea of fair trade, but if the focus is on "fair" rather than "unfair" trade, then the key issue is who decides what type of trade is fair or otherwise.

As long as the United States does not exit the World Trade Organization, America, like any other member of the WTO, is subject to the body's arbitration mechanism to settle trade disputes.

The Trump administration may renegotiate the North America Free Trade Agreement or quit the Trans Pacific Partnership, but if it does, it will still be opting for negotiation and bilateral trade agreements with Asia-Pacific nations and other trade partners. In other words, Trump may not be a fan of globalism, but he still subscribes to bilateralism and even internationalism.

China, for its part, could well live with a China-US bilateral trade and investment framework, along with a WTO cap. The ongoing negotiation of the Bilateral Investment Treaty is an example. Trump wants "smart" negotiation, to which China has no objection. But if Trump refuses to settle disputes through negotiation, then China won't be happy.

Still, China is wary of the possibility that the Trump team might try to play the Taiwan card as part of any bargaining. This would be unacceptable -- China may be willing to negotiate or renegotiate over trade, investment and currency levels, but it will in no way be willing to renegotiate the "One China" principle . This is one thing that China will never put up for sale.

If the Trump administration can understand this key point quickly, and if it acts in a diplomatic way, then Trump does indeed have a chance to make America truly great again.

Shen Dingli is professor and associate dean at the Institute of International Studies at Fudan University.

South Africa: Trump brings a new style

Tinashe Chuchu

South Africans in general were more inclined to support Hillary Clinton for president, but that did not happen. Why the support for Clinton? Because South Africans valued the longstanding relationship that their nation had developed with the Clintons, especially during the Mandela years.

Now that the election is over and Donald Trump has won, South Africa -- like many other nations -- hopes that it will be able to secure favorable trade relations with the Trump administration. Of course, the signs from the Trump camp suggest that the incoming administration will take a tough stance on trade. And though Trump did not single out South Africa specifically for criticism, he did warn more broadly that deals would need to be rethought because the United States is always losing out on trade agreements.

Another issue that might be of interest to South Africans is US immigration policy toward South Africa. Again, Trump warned over the threat posed by certain kinds of immigration, which became a feature of his campaign. If he cracks down it could make it tougher for South Africans wishing to secure a US visa.

But it's not all trepidation. Some South Africans admire Trump's apparent success with his own businesses. They hope that he will enjoy similar success running the United States. Indeed, if Trump is successful and the US economy performs well under his presidency, countries like South Africa will likely benefit, too.

As John Stremlau, former vice president of the Carter Center, told Africa's News24 , it is still unclear what shape the Trump administration's foreign policy will take. However, as a businessman, it seems that Trump is determined to try his hand at making deals. It will be interesting to see what this new style means for business with Africa.

Tinashe Chuchu is a lecturer in the School of Economic and Business Sciences at the University of the Witwatersrand in South Africa.

Egypt: A lesson for Americans

Adel Abdel Ghafar

The election of Donald Trump was welcome news in Cairo. The US President-elect and Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi met each other on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly meeting last September. After that meeting, both expressed a mutual admiration for one another. Sisi remarked that Trump would make a strong leader, which Trump reciprocated by praising Sisi as a "fantastic guy." Sisi was reportedly the first Arab leader to congratulate Trump, and recently reportedly stated to the Egyptian press that he knew Trump would win as "his honesty touched the hearts of the American people."

It's not hard to imagine why these two men would get along. Both are not particularly fond of protecting human rights, and have demonstrated a deep disdain for the press. They abhor Islamists of all shapes and forms. Neither man handles criticism well, as demonstrated by their emotional outbursts. Both admire Vladimir Putin, who has spent time cultivating them both.

Overall, they share an identical black and white world view, reminiscent of George W. Bush's "you are either with us or against us." There is no middle way in Trump and Sisi's world; only enemies to be annihilated or friends based on mutual interests.

With regards to Egypt and the Middle East, discourse on human rights and democratization will become background noise, as the Trump administration's foreign policy will likely focus on advancing US economic and security interests. Trump and Sisi began collaborating even before the President-elect assumed office: Trump reportedly called on Sisi to withdraw the U.N. resolution against Israeli settlements , which ultimately passed.

Conveniently, the Egyptian media has dropped the commentary from Trump about Muslim bans and registries from its coverage, while equating the President-elect with Sisi; a strongman who will bring stability in an age of turbulence. However, almost three years since Sisi's election, many segments of the Egyptian population feel disappointed in his leadership, as he has failed to bring stability or usher in the era of economic prosperity that he promised.

Given time, the American people, like their Egyptian counterparts, are also likely to find themselves profoundly unhappy with their new president.

Adel Abdel Ghafar is a visiting fellow at the Brookings Doha Center and the author of " Egyptians in Revolt: The Political Economy of Labor and Student Mobilizations 1919 -2011 ."

Philippines: Will Trump challenge Duterte?

Mong Palatino

Considering that there are, by some estimates , around 300,000 Filipinos living as undocumented migrants in the United States, the question for many here is whether President Donald Trump will be true to his campaign promise of being tough on illegal immigration.

As for the about 3.5 million Filipinos living in the United States , they join other Americans in hoping that the Trump presidency will deliver stable jobs, better health care, and safer communities.

Like other Southeast Asian countries, the Philippines wants to know whether Trump will continue to endorse the rebalancing of American forces toward the Asia-Pacific region. More specifically, Filipinos have two other questions on defense: What will Trump's policy be regarding the maritime dispute in the South China Sea involving China and its smaller neighbors? Will he uphold the mutual defense pact between the Philippines and the United States?

It is not only on defense that a Trump presidency raises questions for Filipinos. In terms of his economic program, for example, many wonder whether his vow to protect American businesses will mean less investment in the Philippines and the rest of Asia? They also wonder whether his call for the return of manufacturing and outsourced jobs to the United States will disrupt Asian economies.

Interestingly, Trump is often compared to Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte. Both are non-traditional politicians who achieved surprising electoral victories despite their controversial, divisive -- sometimes politically incorrect -- views.

Duterte has frequently criticized the United States for its colonial crimes and political meddling, even making an unprecedented declaration of a "separation" of the Philippines and the United States. President Obama chose to ignore Duterte's rants. Will Trump do the same thing? Will he comment on the alleged American plot to destabilize Duterte's government

Both are interesting questions. But perhaps the biggest question mark is over whether Donald Trump will raise the issue of human rights with Duterte, whose war on drugs has, by many accounts, left thousands of civilians dead.

Filipinos are extremely curious to find out what happens next.

Mong Palatino is a Filipino activist, blogger, and former legislator.Story highlights McTernan: President Trump's defeat of Hillary Clinton did not rewrite the laws of politics

Misleading the media, it turns out, is as bad in the era of the tweeting President as it was in that of the President as Orator-in-Chief

John McTernan is a former speechwriter for ex-British Prime Minister Tony Blair and ex-communications director to former Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) "All political careers end in failure" was the famous saying of British politician Enoch Powell.

It is a very memorable phrase because it highlights one of the fundamental laws of politics -- that there is such a thing as political gravity.

However high you fly, you will eventually fall to earth. Tony Blair was one of the most popular British prime ministers in history, but his reputation has yet to recover from the aftermath of the Iraq War.

President Obama ended his two terms in office with high approval ratings but is now seeing his legacy dismantled after his party failed to win a third consecutive term in office.

The watchword of leadership should always be "Beware!" -- you always have less time than you think. Less time to achieve radical change. Less time to assemble coalitions of support. Less time until the shine comes off you.

Read MoreANNOUNCE HIS NEW NOMINEE FOR SECRETARY OF LABOR

FEBRUARY 16, 2017

SPEAKER: PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP

[*]

TRUMP: Thank you very much.

I just wanted to begin by mentioning that the nominee for secretary of the Department of Labor will be Mr. Alex Acosta. He has a law degree from Harvard Law School, was a great student; former clerk for Justice Samuel Alito. And he has had a tremendous career. He's a member and has been a member of the National Labor Relations Board, and has been through Senate confirmation three times, confirmed; did very, very well.

And so Alex, I've wished him the best. We just spoke. And he's going to be -- I think he'll be a tremendous secretary of labor.

And also as you probably heard just a little while ago, Mick Mulvaney, former congressman, has just been approved weeks late, I have to say that, weeks, weeks late, Office of Management and Budget. And he will be I think a fantastic addition.

Paul Singer just left. As you know, Paul was very much involved with the anti-Trump or as they say, "never Trump." And Paul just left and he's given us his total support. And it's all about unification. We're unifying the party and hopefully we're going to be able to unify the country. It's very important to me. I've been talking about that for a long time. It's very, very important to me.

So I want to thank Paul Singer for being here and for coming up to the office. He was a very strong opponent, and now he's a very strong ally. And I appreciate that.

I think I'll say a few words, and then we'll take some questions. And I had this time. We've been negotiating a lot of different transactions to save money on contracts that were terrible, including airplane contracts that were out of control and late and terrible; just absolutely catastrophic in terms of what was happening. And we've done some really good work. We're very proud of that.

And then right after that, you prepare yourselves, we'll do some questions, unless you have enough questions. That's always a possibility.

I'm here today to update the American people on the incredible progress that has been made in the last four weeks since my inauguration. We have made incredible progress. I don't think there's ever been a president elected who in this short period of time has done what we've done.

A new Rasmussen poll, in fact -- because the people get it -- much of the media doesn't get it. They actually get it, but they don't write it. Let's put it that way. But a new Rasmussen poll just came out just a very short while ago, and it has our approval rating at 55 percent and going up. The stock market has hit record numbers, as you know. And there has been a tremendous surge of optimism in the business world, which is -- to me means something much different than it used to. It used to mean, "Oh, that's good." Now it means, "That's good for jobs." Very different.

Plants and factories are already starting to move back into the United States, and big league -- Ford, General Motors, so many of them. I'm making this presentation directly to the American people, with the media present, which is an honor to have you. This morning, because many of our nation's reporters and folks will not tell you the truth, and will not treat the wonderful people of our country with the respect that they deserve. And I hope going forward we can be a little bit -- a little bit different, and maybe get along a little bit better, if that's possible. Maybe it's not, and that's OK, too.

TRUMP: Unfortunately, much of the media in Washington, D.C., along with New York, Los Angeles in particular, speaks not for the people, but for the special interests and for those profiting off a very, very obviously broken system. The press has become so dishonest that if we don't talk about, we are doing a tremendous disservice to the American people. Tremendous disservice. We have to talk to find out what's going on, because the press honestly is out of control. The level of dishonesty is out of control.

I ran for president to present the citizens of our country. I am here to change the broken system so it serves their families and their communities well. I am talking -- and really talking on this very entrenched power structure, and what we're doing is we're talking about the power structure; we're talking about its entrenchment. As a result, the media is going through what they have to go through too often times distort - not all the time - and some of the media is fantastic, I have to say - they're honest and fantastic.

But much of it is not a - the distortion -- and we'll talk about it, you'll be able to ask me questions about it. But we're not going to let it happen, because I'm here again, to take my message straight to the people. As you know, our administration inherited many problems across government and across the economy. To be honest, I inherited a mess. It's a mess. At home and abroad, a mess. Jobs are pouring out of the country; you see what's going on with all of the companies leaving our country, going to Mexico and other places, low pay, low wages, mass instability overseas, no matter where you look. The middle east is a disaster. North Korea - we'll take care of it folks; we're going to take care of it all. I just want to let you know, I inherited a mess.

Beginning on day one, our administration went to work to tackle these challenges. On foreign affairs, we've already begun enormously productive talks with many foreign leaders, much of it you've covered, to move forward towards stability, security and peace in the most troubled regions of the world, which there are many. We have had great conversations with the United Kingdom, and meetings. Israel, Mexico, Japan, China and Canada, really, really productive conversations. I would say far more productive than you would understand.

We've even developed a new council with Canada to promote women's business leaders and entrepreneurs. It's very important to me, very important to my daughter Ivanka. I have directed our defense community headed by our great general, now Secretary Mattis. He's over there now working very hard to submit a plan for the defeat of ISIS, a group that celebrates the murder and torture of innocent people in large sections of the world. It used to be a small group, now it's in large sections of the world.

They've spread like cancer. ISIS has spread like cancer - another mess I inherited. And we have imposed new sanctions on the nation of Iran, whose totally taken advantage of our previous administration, and they're the world's top sponsor of terrorism, and we're not going to stop until that problem is properly solved. And it's not properly solved now, it's one of the worst agreements I've ever seen drawn by anybody. I've ordered plan to begin building for the massive rebuilding of the United States military. Had great support from the Senate, I've had great from Congress, generally.

We've pursued this rebuilding in the hopes that we will never have to use this military, and I will tell you that is my - I would be so happy if we never had to use it. But our country will never have had a military like the military we're about to build and rebuild. We have the greatest people on earth in our military, but they don't have the right equipment and their equipment is old. I used it; I talked about it at every stop. Depleted, it's depleted - it won't be depleted for long. And I think one of the reason I'm standing here instead of other people is that frankly, I talked about we have to have a strong military.

We have to have a strong law enforcement also. So we do not go abroad in the search of war, we really are searching for peace, but its peace through strength. At home, we have begun the monumental task of returning the government back to the people on a scale not seen in many, many years. In each of these actions, I'm keeping my promises to the American people. These are campaign promises. Some people are so surprised that we're having strong borders.

Well, that's what I've been talking about for a year and a half, strong borders. They're so surprised, oh, he having strong borders, well that's what I've been talking about to the press and to everybody else. One promise after another after years of politicians lying to you to get elected. They lied to the American people in order to get elected. Some of the things I'm doing probably aren't popular but they're necessary for security and for other reasons.

And then coming to Washington and pursuing their own interests which is more important to many politicians. I'm here following through on what I pledged to do. That's all I'm doing. I put it out before the American people, got 306 electoral college votes. I wasn't supposed to get 222. They said there's no way to get 222, 230's impossible.

270 which you need, that was laughable. We got 306 because people came out and voted like they've never seen before so that's the way it goes. I guess it was the biggest electoral college win since Ronald Reagan. In other words, the media's trying to attack our administration because they know we are following through on pledges that we made and they're not happy about it for whatever reason.

And - but a lot of people are happy about it. In fact, I'll be in Melbourne, Florida five o'clock on Saturday and I heard - just heard that the crowds are massive that want to be there. I turn on the T.V., open the newspapers and I see stories of chaos. Chaos. Yet it is the exact opposite. This administration is running like a fine- tuned machine, despite the fact that I can't get my cabinet approved.

And they're outstanding people like Senator Dan Coats who's there, one of the most respected men of the Senate. He can't get approved. How do you not approve him? He's been a colleague - highly respected. Brilliant guy, great guy, everybody knows it. We're waiting for approval. So we have a wonderful group of people that's working very hard, that's being very much misrepresented about and we can't let that happen.

So, if the Democrats who have - all you have to do is look at where they are right now. The only thing they can do is delay because they screwed things up royally, believe me. Let me list to you some of the things that we've done in just a short period of time. I just got here. And I got here with no cabinet. Again, each of these actions is a promise I made to the American people.

I'll go over just some of them and we have a lot happening next week and in the weeks - in the weeks coming. We've withdrawn from the job-killing disaster known as Trans Pacific Partnership. We're going to make trade deals but we're going to have one on one deals, bilateral. We're going to have one on one deals.

We've directed the elimination of regulations that undermine manufacturing and call for expedited approval of the permits needed for America and American infrastructure and that means plant, equipment, roads, bridges, factories. People take 10, 15, 20 years to get disapproved for a factory. They go in for a permit, it's many, many years. And then at the end of the process -- they spend 10s of millions of dollars on nonsense and at the end of the process, they get rejected.

Now, they may be rejected with me but it's going to be a quick rejection. Not going to take years. But mostly it's going to be an acceptance. We want plants built and we want factories built and we want the jobs. We don't want the jobs going to other countries. We've imposed a hiring freeze on non-essential federal workers. We've imposed a temporary moratorium on new federal regulations.

We've issued a game-changing new rule that says for each one new regulation, two old regulations must be eliminated. Makes sense. Nobody's ever seen regulations like we have. You go to other countries and you look at indexes (ph) they have and you say "let me see your regulations" and they're fraction, just a tiny fraction of what we have. And I want regulations because I want safety, I want environmental - all environmental situations to be taken properly care of. It's very important to me. But you don't need four or five or six regulations to take care of the same thing.

We've stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We've directed the creation of a task force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation -- take a look at Chicago and others, taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible.

We've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We're becoming a drug infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars. We are not going to let it happen any longer.

We've undertaken the most substantial border security measures in a generation to keep our nation and our tax dollars safe. And are now in the process of beginning to build a promised wall on the southern border, met with general -- now Secretary Kelly yesterday and we're starting that process. And the wall is going to be a great wall and it's going to be a wall negotiated by me. The price is going to come down just like it has on everything else I've negotiated for the government. And we are going to have a wall that works, not gonna have a wall like they have now which is either non-existent or a joke.

We've ordered a crackdown on sanctuary cities that refuse to comply with federal law and that harbor criminal aliens, and we have ordered an end to the policy of catch and release on the border. No more release. No matter who you are, release. We have begun a nationwide effort to remove criminal aliens, gang members, drug dealers and others who pose a threat to public safety. We are saving American lives every single day.

The court system has not made it easy for us. And are even creating a new office in Homeland Security dedicated to the forgotten American victims of illegal immigrant violence, which there are many. We have taken decisive action to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. No parts are necessary and constitutional actions were blocked by judges, in my opinion, incorrect, and unsafe ruling. Our administration is working night and day to keep you safe, including reporters safe. And is vigorously defending this lawful order.

I will not back down from defending our country. I got elected on defense of our country. I keep my campaign promises, and our citizens will be very happy when they see the result. They already are, I can tell you that. Extreme vetting will be put in place and it already is in place in many places.

In fact, we had to go quicker than we thought because of the bad decision we received from a circuit that has been overturned at a record number. I have heard 80 percent, I find that hard to believe, that is just a number I heard, that they are overturned 80 percent of the time. I think that circuit is -- that circuit is in chaos and that circuit is frankly in turmoil. But we are appealing that, and we are going further.

We're issuing a new executive action next week that will comprehensively protect our country. So we'll be going along the one path and hopefully winning that, at the same time we will be issuing a new and very comprehensive order to protect our people. That will be done sometime next week, toward the beginning or middle at the latest part. We have also taken steps to begin construction of the Keystone Pipeline and Dakota Access Pipelines. Thousands and thousands of jobs, and put new buy American measures in place to require American steel for American pipelines. In other words, they build a pipeline in this country, and we use the powers of government to make that pipeline happen, we want them to use American steel. And they are willing to do that, but nobody ever asked before I came along. Even this order was drawn and they didn't say that.

TRUMP: And I'm reading the order, I'm saying, why aren't we using American steel? And they said, that's a good idea, we put it in. To drain the swamp of corruption in Washington, D.C., I've started by imposing a five-year lobbying ban on White House officials and a lifetime ban on lobbying for a foreign government.

We've begun preparing to repeal and replace Obamacare. Obamacare is a disaster, folks. It is's disaster. I know you can say, oh, Obamacare. I mean, they fill up our alleys with people that you wonder how they get there, but they are not the Republican people our that representatives are representing.

So we've begun preparing to repeal and replace Obamacare, and are deep in the midst of negotiations on a very historic tax reform to bring our jobs back, to bring our jobs back to this country. Big league. It's already happening. But big league.

I've also worked to install a cabinet over the delays and obstruction of Senate Democrats. You've seen what they've done over the last long number of years. That will be one of the great cabinets ever assembled in American history.

You look at Rex Tillerson. He's out there negotiating right now. General Mattis I mentioned before, General Kelly. We have great, great people. Mick is with us now. We have great people.

Among their responsibilities will be ending the bleeding of jobs from our country and negotiating fair trade deals for our citizens.

Now look, fair trade. Not free, fair. If a country is taking advantage of us, not going to let that happen anymore. Every country takes advantage of us almost. I may be able to find a couple that don't. But for the most part, that would be a very tough job for me to do.

Jobs have already started to surge. Since my election, Ford announced it will abandon its plans to build a new factory in Mexico, and will instead invest $700 million in Michigan, creating many, many jobs.

Fiat Chrysler announced it will invest $1 billion in Ohio and Michigan, creating 2,000 new American jobs. They were with me a week ago. You know you were here.

General Motors likewise committed to invest billions of dollars in its American manufacturing operation, keeping many jobs here that were going to leave. And if I didn't get elected, believe me, they would have left. And these jobs and these things that I'm announcing would never have come here.

Intel just announced that it will move ahead with a new plant in Arizona that probably was never going to move ahead with. And that will result in at least 10,000 American jobs.

Walmart announced it will create 10,000 jobs in the United States just this year because of our various plans and initiatives. There will be many, many more, many more, these are a few that we're naming.

Other countries have been taking advantage of us for decades -- decades, and decades, and decades, folks. And we're not going to let that happen anymore. Not going to let it happen.

And one more thing, I have kept my promise to the American people by nominating a justice of the United States Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch, who is from my list of 20, and who will be a true defender of our laws and our Constitution, highly respected, should get the votes from the Democrats. You may not see that. But he'll get there one way or the other. But he should get there the old-fashioned way, and he should get those votes.

This last month has represented an unprecedented degree of action on behalf of the great citizens of our country. Again, I say it. There has never been a presidency that's done so much in such a short period of time. And we have not even started the big work yet. That starts early next week.

Some very big things are going to be announced next week. So we are just getting started. We will be giving a speech, as I said, in Melbourne, Florida, at 5:00 p.m. I hope to see you there.

And with that, I just say, God bless America, and let's take some questions.

Mara (ph), Mara (ph), go ahead. You were cut off pretty violently at our last news conference.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)

TRUMP: Mike Flynn is a fine person, and I asked for his resignation. He respectfully gave it. He is a man who there was a certain amount of information given to Vice President Pence, who is with us today. And I was not happy with the way that information was given.

He didn't have to do that, because what he did wasn't wrong -- what he did in terms of the information he saw. What was wrong was the way that other people, including yourselves in this room, were given that information, because that was classified information that was given illegally. That's the real problem.

And, you know, you can talk all you want about Russia, which was all a, you know, fake news, fabricated deal, to try and make up for the loss of the Democrats and the press plays right into it. In fact, I saw a couple of the people that were supposedly involved with all of this -- that they know nothing about it; they weren't in Russia; they never made a phone call to Russia; they never received a phone call.

It's all fake news. It's all fake news. The nice thing is, I see it starting to turn, where people are now looking at the illegal -- I think it's very important -- the illegal, giving out classified information. It was -- and let me just tell you, it was given out like so much.

I'll give you an example. I called, as you know, Mexico. It was a very, very confidential, classified call. But I called Mexico. And in calling Mexico, I figured, oh, well that's -- I spoke to the president of Mexico; I had a good call. All of a sudden, it's out there for the world to see. It's supposed to be secret. It's supposed to be either confidential or classified, in that case.

Same thing with Australia. All of a sudden, people are finding out exactly what took place. The same thing happened with respect to General Flynn. Everybody saw this. And I'm saying -- the first thing I thought of when I heard about it is: How does the press get this information that's classified? How do they do it?

You know why? Because it's an illegal process and the press should be ashamed of themselves. But more importantly, the people that gave out the information to the press should be ashamed of themselves, really ashamed.

Yes, go ahead.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)

TRUMP: Because when I looked at the information, I said, "I don't think he did anything wrong; if anything, he did something right." He was coming into office. He looked at the information. He said, "Huh, that's fine." That's what they're supposed to do. They're supposed to -- he didn't just call Russia. He called and spoke to both ways, I think there were 30-some-odd countries. He's doing the job.

You know, he was doing his job. The thing is, he didn't tell our vice president properly, and then he said he didn't remember. So either way, it wasn't very satisfactory to me. And I have somebody that I think will be outstanding for the position. And that also helps, I think, in the making of my decision.

But he didn't tell the vice president of the United States the facts. And then he didn't remember. And that just wasn't acceptable to me.

Yes?

QUESTION: (inaudible) clarification here. During your campaign, did anyone from your team (inaudible) Russian government or Russian intelligence? And if so, what was the nature of those conversations (inaudible)? TRUMP: The failing New York Times wrote a big, long front-page story yesterday. And it was very much discredited, as you know. It was -- it's a joke. And the people mentioned in the story, I notice they were on television today saying they never even spoke to Russia. They weren't even a part, really -- I mean, they were such a minor part. They -- I hadn't spoken to them.

I think the one person -- I don't think I've ever spoken to him. I don't think I've ever met him. And he actually said he was a very low-level member of I think a committee for a short period of time. I don't think I ever met him. Now, it's possible that I walked into a room and he was sitting there, but I don't think I ever met him. I didn't talk to him ever. And he thought it was a joke.

The other person said he never spoke to Russia; never received a call. Look at his phone records, et cetera, et cetera. And the other person, people knew that he represented various countries, but I don't think he represented Russia, but knew that he represented various countries. That's what he does. I mean, people know that.

That's Mr. Manafort, who's -- by the way, who's by the way a respected man. He's a respected man. But I think he represented the Ukraine or Ukraine government or somebody, but everybody -- people knew that. Everybody knew that.

So, these people -- and he said that he has absolutely nothing to do and never has with Russia. And he said that very forcefully. I saw his statement. He said it very forcefully. Most of the papers don't print it because that's not good for their stories.

TRUMP: So the three people that they talked about all totally deny it. And I can tell you, speaking for myself, I own nothing in Russia. I have no loans in Russia. I don't have any deals in Russia. President Putin called me up very nicely to congratulate me on the win of the election.

He then, called me up extremely nicely to congratulate me on the inauguration, which was terrific. But so did many other leaders, almost all other leaders from almost all of the country. So that's the extent.

Russia is fake news. Russia -- this is fake news put out by the media. The real news is the fact that people, probably from the Obama administration because they're there, because we have our new people going in place, right now.

As you know, Mike Pompeo has -- has now taken control of the CIA, James Comey at FBI, Dan Coats is waiting to be approved, I mean he is a senator and a highly respected one and he's still waiting to be approved. But our new people are going in.

And just while you're at it, because you mentioned this, Wall Street Journal did a story today that was almost as disgraceful as the failing New York Time's story, yesterday. And it talked about -- these are (ph) front page.

So director of national intelligence just put out, acting a statement, any suggestion that the United States intelligence community, this was just given to us, is withholding information and not providing the best possible intelligence to the president and his national security team is not true.

So they took this front page story out of The Wall Street Journal top and they just wrote the story that its not true. And I'll tell you something, I'll be honest, because I sort of enjoy this back and forth that I guess I have all my life but I've never seen more dishonest media than frankly, the political media. I thought the financial media was much better, much more honest.

But I will say that, I never get phone calls from the media. How did they write a story like that in The Wall Street Journal without asking me or how did they write a story in The New York Times, put it on front page?

That was like the story they wrote about the women and me, front page, big massive story. And it was nasty and then they called, they said we never said that, we like Mr. Trump. They called up my office, we like Mr. Trump, we never said that.

And it was totally -- they totally misrepresented those very wonderful women, I have to tell you, totally misrepresented. I said give us the retraction. They never gave us a retraction and frankly, I then went on to other things.

OK, go ahead.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE) said today that you have big intellectual margins (inaudible) 300 or more (ph), or 350 (ph) electoral (ph) votes. President Obama about 365 (OFF-MIKE).

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Yeah.

QUESTION: Obama (OFF-MIKE) 426 on (OFF-MIKE). So why should Americans...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ...I'm skipping that information, I don't know, I was just given (ph) we had a very, very big margin.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE) why should Americans trust you (OFF-MIKE) the information (OFF-MIKE)?

TRUMP: Well, I don't know, I was given that information. I was given -- I actually, I've seen that information around. But it was a very substantial victory, do you agree with that? OK thank you, that's...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Go ahead Sir, yes?

QUESTION: Can you tell us in determining that Lieutenant General Flynn did -- whether there was no wrongdoing in your mind, what evidence was weighed? Did you ask for transcripts of these telephone intercepts with Russian officials, particularly the Ambassador Sergey Kislyak, who he was communicating with?

What-- what evidence did you weigh to determine that there was no wrongdoing? Further to that, Sir, you said on a couple of locations this morning, you are going to aggressively pursue the source of these leaks.

TRUMP: We are.

QUESTION: Can we ask what you're going to do and also, we've heard about a -- a review of the intelligence community headed up by Steven Feinberg, what can you tell us about that?

TRUMP: Well, first of all about that, we now have Dan Coats, hopefully soon, Mike Pompeo and James Comey and they're in position so I hope that we'll be able to straighten that out without using anybody else.

The gentleman you mentioned is a very talented man, very successful man and he's offered his services and you know, it's something we may take advantage of. But I don't think we're need that at all because of the fact that you know, I think that we are gonna be able to straighten it out very easily on its own.

As far as the general's concerned, when I first heard about it, I said huh, that doesn't sound wrong. My counsel came, Don McGahn, White House Counsel, and he told me and I asked him, he can speak very well for himself. He said he doesn't think anything is wrong, you know, really didn't think.

It was really, what happened after that but he didn't think anything was done wrong. I didn't either because I waited a period of time and I started to think about it, I said "well I don't see" -- to me, he was doing the job.

The information was provided by -- who I don't know, Sally Yates. And I was a little surprised because I said "doesn't sound like he did anything wrong there." But he did something wrong with respect to the vice president and I thought that was not acceptable. As far as -- as far as the actual making the call, fact I've watched various programs and I've read various articles where he was just doing his job.

That was very normal. You know, first everybody got excited because they thought he did something wrong. After they thought about it, it turned out he was just doing his job. So -- and I do. And by the way, with all of that being said, I do think he's a fine man.

QUESTION: Sir, if I could, on the leaks -- on the leaks, sir...

TRUMP: ...Go ahead. Finish off then I'll get you.

QUESTION: I'm sorry. What will you do on the leaks? You've said twice today...

TRUMP: ...Yes, we're looking at them very -- very, very serious. I've gone to all of the folks in charge of the various agencies and we're -- I've actually called the Justice Department to look into the leaks. Those are criminal leaks. They're put out by people either in agencies -- I think you'll see it stopping because now we have our people in. You know, again, we don't have our people in because we can't get them approved by the Senate.

We just had Jeff Sessions approved. Injustice, as an example (ph). So, we are looking into that very seriously. It's a criminal act. You know what I say, when I -- when I was called out on Mexico, I was shocked because all this equipment, all this incredible phone equipment -- when I was called out on Mexico, I was -- honestly, I was really, really surprised.

But I said "you know, it doesn't make sense. That won't happen" but that wasn't that important a call, it was fine, I could show it to the world and he could show it to the world, the president who's a very fine man, by the way. Same thing with Australia. I said "that's terrible that it was leaked" but it wasn't that important. But then I said to myself "what happens when I'm dealing with the problem of North Korea?"

What happens when I'm dealing with the problems in the Middle East? Are you folks going to be reporting all of that very, very confidential information, very important, very -- you know, I mean at the highest level? Are you going to be reporting about that too? So, I don't want classified information getting out to the public and in a way that was almost a test.

So I'm dealing with Mexico, I'm dealing with Argentina, we were dealing on this case with Mike Flynn. All this information gets put into the "Washington Post" and gets put into the "New York Times" and I'm saying "what's going to happen when I'm dealing on the Middle East? What's going to happen when I'm dealing with really, really important subjects like North Korea?

We got to stop it. That's why it's a criminal penalty.

QUESTION: I just want to get you to clarify this very important point. Can you say definitively that nobody on your campaign had any contacts with the Russians during the campaign? And on the leaks, is it fake news or are these real leaks?

TRUMP: Well the leaks are real. You're the one that wrote about them and reported them, I mean the leaks are real. You know what they said, you saw it and the leaks are absolutely real. The news is fake because so much of the news is fake. So one thing that I felt it was very important to do -- and I hope we can correct it. Because there's nobody I have more respect for -- well, maybe a little bit but the reporters, good reporters.

It's very important to me and especially in this position. It's very important. I don't mind bad stories. I can handle a bad story better than anybody as long as it's true and, you know, over a course of time, I'll make mistakes and you'll write badly and I'm OK with that. But I'm not OK when it is fake. I mean, I watch CNN, it's so much anger and hatred and just the hatred.

I don't watch it any more because it's very good -- he's saying no. It's OK, Jim (ph). It's OK, Jim (ph), you'll have your chance. But I watch others too. You're not the only one so don't feel badly. But I think it should be straight. I think it should be -- I think it would be frankly more interesting. I know how good everybody's ratings are right now but I think that actually -- I think that'd actually be better.

People -- I mean, you have a lower approval rate than Congress. I think that's right. I don't know, Peter (ph), is that one right? Because you know I think they have lower -- I heard lower than Congress. But honestly, the public would appreciate it, I'd appreciate it -- again, I don't mind bad stories when it's true but we have an administration where the Democrats are making it very difficult.

TRUMP: I think we're setting a record or close to a record in the time of approval of a cabinet. I mean, the numbers are crazy. When I'm looking, some of them had them approved immediately.

I'm going forever and I still have a lot of people that we're waiting for. And that's all they're doing, is delaying. And you look at Schumer and the mess that he's got over there and they have nothing going. The only thing they can do is delay. And, you know, I think that they'd be better served by, you know, approving and making sure that they're happy and everybody's good.

And sometimes -- I mean, I know President Obama lost three or four, and you lose them on the way, and that's OK. That's fine. But I think it would -- I think they would be much better served, John, if they just went through the process quickly. This is pure delay tactics.

And they say it, and everybody understands it. Yeah, go ahead, Jimmy.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)

TRUMP: Well, I had nothing to do with it. I have nothing to do with Russia. I told you, I have no deals there, I have no anything. Now, when WikiLeaks, which I had nothing to do with, comes out and happens to give, they're not giving classified information. They're giving stuff -- what was said at an office about Hillary cheating on the debates.

Which, by the way, nobody mentions. Nobody mentions that Hillary received the questions to the debates. Can you imagine -- seriously -- can you imagine if I received the questions? It would be the electric chair. OK, he should be put in the electric -- you would even call for the reinstitution of the death penalty, OK. Maybe not you John. Yes? We'll do you next Jim, I do you next(ph).

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE) clarify --

TRUMP: Yes, yes, sure

QUESTION: Did you direct Mike Flynn to discuss sanctions with the Russian ambassador --

TRUMP: No, I didn't.

QUESTION: -- prior to your -- TRUMP: No, I didn't.

QUESTION: -- inauguration.

TRUMP: No, I didn't.

QUESTION: And then fired him --

TRUMP: Excuse me.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)

TRUMP: No, I fired him because of what he said to Mike Pence. Very simple. Mike was doing his job. He was calling countries and his counterparts. So, it certainly would have been OK with me if he did it. I would have directed him to do it if I thought he wasn't doing it.

I didn't direct him, but I would have directed him because that's his job. And it came out that way -- and in all fairness, I watched Dr. Charles Krauthammer the other night say he was doing his job and I agreed with him. And since then, I've watched many other people say that.

No, I didn't direct him, but I would have directed him if he didn't do it. OK? Jim?

QUESTION: Thank you very much, and just for the record, we don't hate you. I don't hate you.

TRUMP: OK.

QUESTION: So, pass that along --

TRUMP: Ask -- ask Jeff Zucker how he got his job. OK?

QUESTION: If I may follow up on some of the questions that have taken place so far here, sir --

TRUMP: Well, that's -- well, you know, we do have other people. You do have other people and your ratings aren't as good as some of the other people that are waiting.

QUESTION: It's pretty good right now, actually.

TRUMP: OK, go ahead, John.

QUESTION: If I may ask, sir, you said earlier that WikiLeaks was revealing information about the Hillary Clinton campaign during the election cycle. You welcomed that. At one time --

TRUMP: I was OK with it.

QUESTION: -- you said -- you said that you loved WikiLeaks. At another campaign press conference you called on the Russians to find the missing 30,000 e-mails. I'm wondering, sir, if you -- TRUMP: Well, she was actually missing 33 and then that got extended with a pile after that.

QUESTION: Then(ph), your(ph) numbers(ph) were off too.

TRUMP: No -- no, but I did say 30. But it was actually higher than that.

QUESTION: If -- if I may ask you, sir, it -- it sounds as though you do not have much credibility here when it comes to leaking if that is something that you encouraged during(ph) the campaign --

TRUMP: OK, fair question. Ready?

QUESTION: Well, if I may ask you that --

TRUMP: No -- no, but let me do one at a time.

QUESTION: If I may as a follow up?

TRUMP: Do you mind?

QUESTION: Yes, sir.

TRUMP: All right. So, in one case, you're talking about highly classified information. In the other case, you're talking about John Podesta saying bad things about the boss. I will say this, if John Podesta said that about me and he was working for me, I would have fired him so fast your head would have spun.

He said terrible things about her. But it wasn't classified information. But in one case, you're talking about classified -- regardless, if you look at the RNC, we had a very strong -- at my suggestion -- and I give Reince great credit for this -- at my suggestion, because I know something about this world, I said I want a very strong defensive mechanism.

I don't want to be hacked. And we did that. And you have seen that they tried to hack us and they failed. The DNC did not do that. And if they did it, they could not have been hacked. But they were hacked and terrible things came in. And, you know, the only thing that I do think is unfair is some of the things were so -- they were -- when I heard some of those things I picked up the papers the next morning and said, oh, this is going to be front page, it wasn't even in the papers.

Again, if I had that happen to me, it would be the biggest story in the history of publishing or the head of newspapers. I would have been headline in every newspaper. I mean, think of it. They gave her the questions to a debate and she -- and she should have reported herself.

Why did Hillary Clinton announce that, "I'm sorry, but I have been given the questions to a debate or a town hall, and I feel that it's inappropriate, and I want to turn in CNN for not doing a good job." QUESTION: And if I may follow up on that, just something that Jonathan Karl (ph) was asking you about. You said that the leaks are real, but the news is fake. I guess I don't understand. It seems that there's a disconnect there. If the information coming from those leaks is real, then how can the stories be fake?

TRUMP: The reporting is fake. Look, look...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: You know what it is? Here's the thing. The public isn't -- you know, they read newspapers, they see television, they watch. They don't know if it's true or false because they're not involved. I'm involved. I've been involved with this stuff all my life. But I'm involved. So I know when you're telling the truth or when you're not. I just see many, many untruthful things.

And I'll tell you what else I see. I see tone. You know the word "tone." The tone is such hatred. I'm really not a bad person, by the way. No, but the tone is such -- I do get good ratings, you have to admit that -- the tone is such hatred.

I watched this morning a couple of the networks. And I have to say, Fox & Friends in the morning, they're very honorable people. They're very -- not because they're good, because they hit me also when I do something wrong. But they have the most honest morning show. That's all I can say. It's the most honest.

But the tone, Jim. If you look -- the hatred. The, I mean, sometimes -- sometimes somebody gets...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Well, you look at your show that goes on at 10 o'clock in the evening. You just take a look at that show. That is a constant hit. The panel is almost always exclusive anti-Trump. The good news is he doesn't have good ratings. But the panel is almost exclusive anti-Trump. And the hatred and venom coming from his mouth; the hatred coming from other people on your network.

Now, I will say this. I watch it. I see it. I'm amazed by it. And I just think you'd be a lot better off, I honestly do. The public gets it, you know. Look, when I go to rallies, they turn around, they start screaming at CNN. They want to throw their placards at CNN. You know.

I -- I think you would do much better by being different. But you just take a look. Take a look at some of your shows in the morning and the evening. If a guest comes out and says something positive about me, it's -- it's brutal.

Now, they'll take this news conference -- I'm actually having a very good time, OK? But they'll take this news conference -- don't forget, that's the way I won. Remember, I used to give you a news conference every time I made a speech, which was like every day. OK?

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: No, that's how I won. I won with news conferences and probably speeches. I certainly didn't win by people listening to you people. That's for sure. But I'm having a good time.

Tomorrow, they will say, "Donald Trump rants and raves at the press." I'm not ranting and raving. I'm just telling you. You know, you're dishonest people. But -- but I'm not ranting and raving. I love this. I'm having a good time doing it.

But tomorrow, the headlines are going to be, "Donald Trump rants and raves." I'm not ranting and raving.

Go ahead.

QUESTION: If I may, just one more followup...

TRUMP: Should I let him have a little bit more? What do you think, Peter? Peter, should I have -- let him have a little bit more?

Sit down. Sit down. We'll...

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: Just because of the attack of fake news and attacking our network, I just want to ask you, sir...

TRUMP: I'm changing it from fake news, though.

QUESTION: Doesn't that under...

TRUMP: Very fake news.

QUESTION: ... I know, but aren't you...

(LAUGHTER)

TRUMP: Go ahead.

QUESTION: Real news, Mr. President, real news.

TRUMP: And you're not related to our new...

QUESTION: I am not related, sir. No. I do like the sound of Secretary Acosta, I must say.

TRUMP: I looked -- you know, I looked at that name. I said, wait a minute, is there any relation there? Alex Acosta.

QUESTION: I'm sure you checked that out, sir.

TRUMP: OK. Now I checked it -- I said -- they said, "No, sir." I said, "Do me a favor, go back and check the family tree."

QUESTION: But aren't you -- aren't you concerned, sir, that you are undermining the people's faith in the First Amendment, freedom of the press, the press in this country, when you call stories you don't like "fake news"? Why not just say it's a story I don't like.

TRUMP: I do that.

QUESTION: When you call it "fake news," you're undermining confidence in our news media (inaudible) important.

TRUMP: No, no. I do that. Here's the thing. OK. I understand what you're -- and you're right about that, except this. See, I know when I should get good and when I should get bad. And sometimes I'll say, "Wow, that's going to be a great story." And I'll get killed.

I know what's good and bad. I'd be a pretty good reporter, not as good as you. But I know what's good. I know what's bad. And when they change it and make it really bad, something that should be positive -- sometimes something that should be very positive, they'll make OK. They'll even make it negative.

So I understand it. So, because I'm there. I know what was said. I know who's saying it. I'm there. So it's very important to me.

Look, I want to see an honest press. When I started off today by saying that it's so important to the public to get an honest press. The press -- the public doesn't believe you people anymore. Now, maybe I had something to do with that. I don't know. But they don't believe you. If you were straight and really told it like it is, as Howard Cosell used to say, right?

Of course, he had some questions also. But if you were straight, I would be your biggest booster. I would be your biggest fan in the world, including bad stories about me. But if you go - as an example, you're CNN, I mean it's story after story after story is bad. I won. I won. And the other thing, chaos because zero chaos. We are running - this is a fine-tuned machine and Reince happens to be doing a good job but half of his job is putting out lies by the press (ph).

You know, I said to him yesterday this whole Russia scam that you guys are building so that you don't talk about the real subject which is illegal leaks, but I watched him yesterday working so hard to try and get that story proper. And I'm saying "here's my chief of staff," a really good guy, did a phenomenal job at RNC. I mean, he won the election, right?

We won the presidency. We got some senators, we got some - all over the country, you take a look, he's done a great job. And I said to myself, you know - and I said to somebody that was in the room, I said "you take a look at Reince, he's working so hard just putting out fires that are fake fires." I mean, they're fake. They're not true. And isn't that a shame because he'd rather be working on healthcare, he'd rather be working on tax reform, Jim (ph).

I mean that. I would be your biggest fan in the world if you treated me right. I sort of understand there's a certain bias maybe by Jeff (ph) or somebody, you know - you know, whatever reason. But - and I understand that. But you've got to be at least a little bit fair and that's why the public sees it. They see it. They see it's not fair. You take a look at some of your shows and you see the bias and the hatred.

And the public is smart, they understand it. Go ahead.

QUESTION: (inaudible) ...for those who believe that there is something to it, is there anything that you have learned over the last few weeks that you might be able to reveal that might ease their concerns that this isn't fake news? And second...

TRUMP: ...I think they don't believe it. I don't think the public - that's why the Rasmussen poll just has me through the roof. I don't think they believe it. Well, I guess one of the reasons I'm here today is to tell you the whole Russian thing, that's a ruse. That's a ruse. And by the way, it would be great if we could get along with Russia, just so you understand that.

Now tomorrow, you'll say "Donald Trump wants to get along with Russia, this is terrible." It's not terrible. It's good. We had Hillary Clinton try and do a reset. We had Hillary Clinton give Russia 20 percent of the uranium in our country. You know what uranium is, right? This thing called nuclear weapons like lots of things are done with uranium including some bad things.

Nobody talks about that. I didn't do anything for Russia. I've done nothing for Russia. Hillary Clinton gave them 20 percent of our uranium. Hillary Clinton did a reset, remember? With the stupid plastic button that made us all look like a bunch of jerks. Here, take a look. He looked at her like, what the hell is she doing with that cheap plastic button?

Hillary Clinton - that was the reset, remember it said reset? Now if I do that, oh, I'm a bad guy. If we could get along with Russia, that's a positive thing. We have a very talented man, Rex Tillerson, who's going to be meeting with them shortly and I told him. I said "I know politically it's probably not good for me." The greatest thing I could do is shoot that ship that's 30 miles off shore right out of the water.

Everyone in this country's going to say "oh, it's so great." That's not great. That's not great. I would love to be able to get along with Russia. Now, you've had a lot of presidents that haven't taken that tack. Look where we are now. Look where we are now. So, if I can - now, I love to negotiate things, I do it really well, and all that stuff. But - but it's possible I won't be able to get along with Putin.

Maybe it is. But I want to just tell you, the false reporting by the media, by you people, the false, horrible, fake reporting makes it much harder to make a deal with Russia. And probably Putin said "you know." He's sitting behind his desk and he's saying "you know, I see what's going on in the United States, I follow it closely. It's going to be impossible for President Trump to ever get along with Russia because of all the pressure he's got with this fake story." OK?

And that's a shame because if we could get along with Russia - and by the way, China and Japan and everyone. If we could get along, it would be a positive thing, not a negative thing.

QUESTION: Is tax reform on the line (ph)?

QUESTION: Mr. President? Mr. President? Mr. President, since you...

TRUMP: Tax reform is going to happen fairly quickly. We're doing Obamacare. We're in final stages. We should be submitting the initial plan in March, early March, I would say. And we have to, as you know, statutorily and for reasons of budget, we have to go first. It's not like, frankly, the tax would be easier, in my opinion, but for statutory reasons and for budgetary reasons, we have to submit the healthcare sooner.

So we'll be submitting healthcare sometime in early March, mid- March. And after that, we're going to come up, and we're doing very well on tax reform.

Yes?

QUESTION: Mr. President, you mentioned Russia. Let's talk about some serious issues that have come up in the last week that you have had to deal with as president of the United States.

TRUMP: OK.

QUESTION: You mentioned the vessel -- the spy vessel off the coast of the United States.

TRUMP: Not good.

QUESTION: There was a ballistic missile test that many interpret as a violation of an agreement between the two countries; and a Russian plane buzzed a U.S. destroyer.

TRUMP: Not good.

QUESTION: I listened to you during the campaign ...

TRUMP: Excuse me, excuse me. When did it happen? It happened when, if you were Putin right now, you would say, "Hey, we're back to the old games with the United States; there's no way Trump can ever do a deal with us." Because the -- you have to understand. If I was just brutal on Russia right now, just brutal, people would say, you would say, "Oh, isn't that wonderful." But I know you well enough.

Then you would say, "Oh, he was too tough; he shouldn't have done that." Look, all of the...

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: I'm just trying to find out your orientation to those...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Wait a minute. Wait, wait. Excuse me just one second.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: All of those things that you mentioned are very recent, because probably Putin assumes that he's not going to be able to make a deal with me because it's politically not popular for me to make a deal. So Hillary Clinton tries a re-set. It failed. They all tried. But I'm different than those people.

Go ahead.

QUESTION: How are you interpreting those moves? And what do you intend to do about them? Have you given Rex Tillerson any advice or counsel on how to deal?

TRUMP: I have. I have. And I'm so beautifully represented. I'm so honored that the Senate approved him. He's going to be fantastic.

Yes, I think that I've already...

QUESTION: Is Putin testing you, do you believe, sir?

TRUMP: No, I don't think so. I think Putin probably assumes that he can't make a deal with me anymore because politically it would be unpopular for a politician to make a deal. I can't believe I'm saying I'm a politician, but I guess that's what I am now.

Because, look, it would be much easier for me to be tough on Russia, but then we're not going to make a deal.

Now, I don't know that we're going to make a deal. I don't know. We might. We might not. But it would be much easier for me to be so tough -- the tougher I am on Russia, the better. But you know what? I want to do the right thing for the American people. And to be honest, secondarily, I want to do the right thing for the world.

If Russia and the United States actually got together and got along -- and don't forget, we're a very powerful nuclear country and so are they. There's no up-side. We're a very powerful nuclear country and so are they. I have been briefed. And I can tell you one thing about a briefing that we're allowed to say because anybody that ever read the most basic book can say it, nuclear holocaust would be like no other.

They're a very powerful nuclear country and so are we. If we have a good relationship with Russia, believe me, that's a good thing, not a bad thing.

QUESTION: So when you say they're not good, do you mean that they are...

TRUMP: Who did I say is not good?

QUESTION: No, I read off the three things that have recently happened. Each one of them you said they're not good.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: No, it's not good, but they happened.

QUESTION: But do they damage the relationship? Do they undermine...

TRUMP: They all happened recently.

No...

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... this country's ability to work with Russia?

TRUMP: They all happened recently. And I understand what they're doing because they're doing the same thing.

Now, again, maybe I'm not going to be able to do a deal with Russia, but at least I will have tried. And if I don't, does anybody really think that Hillary Clinton would be tougher on Russia than Donald Trump? Does anybody in this room really believe that? OK?

But I tell you one thing, she tried to make a deal. She had the re-set. She gave all that valuable uranium away. She did other things. You know, they say I'm close to Russia. Hillary Clinton gave away 20 percent of the uranium in the United States. She's close to Russia.

QUESTION: Can we...

TRUMP: I gave -- you know what I gave to Russia? You know what I gave? Nothing.

QUESTION: Can we conclude there will be no response to these particular provocations?

TRUMP: I'm not going to tell you anything about what response I do. I don't talk about military response. I don't say I'm going into Mosul in four months. "We are going to attack Mosul in four months." Then three months later, "We are going to attack Mosul in one month." "Next week, we are going to attack Mosul."

In the meantime, Mosul is very, very difficult. Do you know why? Because I don't talk about military, and I don't talk about certain other things, you're going to be surprised to hear that. And by the way, my whole campaign, I'd say that. So I don't have to tell you. I don't want to be one of these guys that say, "Yes, here's what we're going to do." I don't have to do that. I don't have to tell you what I'm going to do in North Korea.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Wait a minute. I don't have to tell you what I'm going to do in North Korea. And I don't have to tell you what I'm going to do with Iran. You know why? Because they shouldn't know. And eventually, you guys are going to get tired of asking that question.

TRUMP: So when you ask me what am I going to do with a ship, the Russian ship as an example, I'm not going to tell you. But hopefully, I won't have to do anything, but I'm not going to tell you.

OK.

QUESTION: Could I just ask you -- thank you very much, Mr. President. The trouble...

TRUMP: Where are you from?

QUESTION: BBC.

TRUMP: Here's another beauty.

QUESTION: That's a good line. Impartial, free and fair.

TRUMP: Yeah. Sure.

QUESTION: Mr. President...

TRUMP: Just like CNN right?

QUESTION: On the travel ban -- we could banter back and forth. On the travel ban would you accept that that was a good example of the smooth running of government...

TRUMP: Yeah, I do. I do. Let me tell you about this government...

QUESTION: Were there any mistakes...

TRUMP: Wait. Wait. I know who you are. Just wait.

Let me tell you about the travel ban. We had a very smooth rollout of the travel ban. But we had a bad court. Got a bad decision. We had a court that's been overturned. Again, may be wrong. But I think it's 80 percent of the time, a lot.

We had a bad decision. We're going to keep going with that decision. We're going to put in a new executive order next week some time. But we had a bad decision.

That's the other thing that was wrong with the travel ban. You had Delta with a massive problem with their computer system at the airports. You had some people that were put out there, brought by very nice busses, and they were put out at various locations.

Despite that the only problem that we had is we had a bad court. We had a court that gave us what I consider to be, with great respect, a very bad decision. Very bad for the safety and security of our country. The rollout was perfect.

Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a one-month period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones.

You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that's like you. You have some bad people out there.

Kelly said you can't do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don't have time to come in.

Now nobody ever reports that. But that's why we did it quickly.

Now, if I would've done it a month, everything would've been perfect. The problem is we would've wasted a lot of time, and maybe a lot of lives because a lot of bad people would've come into our country.

Now in the meantime, we're vetting very, very strongly. Very, very strongly. But we need help. And we need help by getting that executive order passed.

QUESTION: Just a brief follow-up. But if it's so urgent, why not introduce...

TRUMP: Yes? Go ahead.

QUESTION: Thank you. I was just hoping that we could get a yes or no answer on one of these questions involving Russia. Can you say whether you are aware that anyone who advised your campaign had contacts with Russia during the course of the election?

TRUMP: Well I told you, Gen. Flynn obviously was dealing. So that's one person. But he was dealing, as he should have been.

QUESTION: During the election?

TRUMP: No. Nobody that I know of. Nobody...

QUESTION: So you're not aware of any contact during the course..

TRUMP: Look, look, look...

QUESTION: ... of the election?

TRUMP: How many times do I have to answer this question?

QUESTION: Can you just say yes or no? TRUMP: Russia is a ruse.

I know you have to get up and ask a question. It's so important.

Russia is a ruse. I have nothing to do with Russia. Haven't made a phone call to Russia in years. Don't speak to people from Russia. Not that I wouldn't. I just have nobody to speak to.

I spoke to Putin twice. He called me on the election. I told you this. And he called me on the inauguration, a few days ago.

We had a very good talk, especially the second one, lasted for a pretty long period of time. I'm sure you probably get it because it was classified. So I'm sure everybody in this room perhaps has it. But we had a very, very good talk.

I have nothing to do with Russia. To the best of my knowledge no person that I deal with does.

Now, Manafort has totally denied it. He denied it. Now people knew that he was a consultant over in that part of the world for a while, but not for Russia. I think he represented Ukraine or people having to do with Ukraine, or people that -- whoever. But people knew that. Everybody knew that.

QUESTION: But in his capacity as your campaign manager, was he in touch with Russian officials during the election?

TRUMP: You know what? He said no. I could only tell you what he -- now he was replaced long before the election. You know that, right?

He was replaced long before the election. When all of this stuff started coming out, it came out during the election. But Paul Manafort, who's a good man also by the way, Paul Manfort was replaced long before the election took place. He was only there for a short period of time.

QUESTION: Mr. President...

TRUMP: How much longer should we stay here, folks?

QUESTION: Mr. President...

TRUMP: Five more minutes. Is that OK? Five?

QUESTION: Mr. President, on national...

TRUMP: Wait. Let's see. Who's -- I want to find a friendly reporter.

QUESTION: Mr....

TRUMP: Are you a friendly reporter? Watch how friendly he is. Wait. Wait. Watch how friendly he is. Go ahead.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)...

TRUMP: Go ahead.

QUESTION: So first of all, my name is (Inaudible) from (Inaudible) Magazine. I (inaudible). I haven't seen anybody in my community, including yourself or any of the -- anyone on your staff of being (OFF-MIKE).

Because (OFF-MIKE). However, what we've already heard about and what we (OFF-MIKE) is (OFF-MIKE) so you're general forecast (ph) like 48 (OFF-MIKE). There are people who are everything (ph) happens through their packs (ph) is one of the (OFF-MIKE)...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP:...he said he was gonna ask a very simple, easy question. And it's not, its not, not -- not a simple question, not a fair question. OK sit down, I understand the rest of your question.

So here's the story, folks. Number one, I am the least anti- Semitic person that you've ever seen in your entire life. Number two, racism, the least racist person. In fact, we did very well relative to other people running as a Republican -- quiet, quiet, quiet.

See, he lied about -- he was gonna get up and ask a very straight, simple question, so you know, welcome to the world of the media. But let me just tell you something, that I hate the charge, I find it repulsive.

I hate even the question because people that know me and you heard the prime minister, you heard Ben Netanyahu (ph) yesterday, did you hear him, Bibi? He said, I've known Donald Trump for a long time and then he said, forget it.

So you should take that instead of having to get up and ask a very insulting question like that.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Yeah, go ahead. Go ahead.

QUESTION: Thank you, I'm Lisa (ph) from the...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: See, it just shows you about the press, but that's the way the press is.

QUESTION: Thank you, Mr. President. Lisa Dejardown (ph) from the PBS News Hour. On national security and immigration, can you give us more details on the executive order you plan for next week? Even its broad outlines?

TRUMP: Yeah.

QUESTION: Will it be focused on specific...

TRUMP: It's a very fair question.

QUESTION: ...countries? And in addition, on the DACA program for immigration.

TRUMP: Right.

QUESTION: What is your plan, do you plan to continue that program or to end it?

TRUMP: We're gonna show great heart, DACA is a very, very difficult subject for me, I will tell you. To me, it's one of the most difficult subjects I have because you have these incredible kids.

In many cases, not in all cases. And some of the cases, having DACA and they're gang members and they're drug dealers, too. But you have some absolutely, incredible kids, I would say mostly. They were brought here in such a way -- it's a very -- it's a very, very tough subject.

We're gonna deal with DACA with heart. I have to deal with a lot of politicians, don't forget and I have to convince them that what I'm saying is -- is right. And I appreciate your understanding on that.

But the DACA situation is a very, very -- it's a very difficult thing for me because you know, I love these kids, I love kids, I have kids and grandkids. And I find it very, very hard doing what the law says exactly to do and you know, the law is rough.

I'm not talking about new laws, I'm talking the existing law, is very rough, it's very, very rough. As far as the new order, the new order is going to be very much tailored to the what I consider to be a very bad decision.

But we can tailor the order to that decision and get just about everything, in some ways, more. But we're tailoring it now to the decision, we have some of the best lawyers in the country working on it.

And the new executive order, is being tailored to the decision we got down from the court. OK?

QUESTION: Mr. President...

(CROSSTALK) QUESTION: ...reopening of the White House Visitors Office?

TRUMP: Yes.

QUESTION: And she does a lot of great work for the country as well (ph). Can you talk a little bit about what's first for (ph) Melania Trump does for the country and (inaudible) so opening White House Visitors Office, what does that mean...

TRUMP: Now, that's what I call a nice question. That is very -- who are you with?

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE)

TRUMP: Good, I'm gonna start watching, all right? Thank you very much. Melania's terrific, she was here last night, we had dinner with Senator Rubio and his wife who is by the way, lovely.

And we had a really good discussion about Cuba because we have very similar views on Cuba. And Cuba was very good to me in the Florida election, as you know the Cuban Americans. And I think that Melania's gonna be outstanding, that's right, she just opened up the visitors center, in other words, touring of the White House.

She, like others that she's working with, feel very, very strongly about women's issue, women's difficulties. Very, very strongly, she's a very, very strong advocate. I think she's a great representative for this country.

And a funny thing happens, because she gets -- she gets so unfairly -- Melania, the things they say. I've known her for a long time, she was a very successful person, she was a very successful model. She did really well.

She would go home at night and didn't even want to go out with people. She was a very private person. She was always the highest quality that you'll ever find. And the things they say -- I've known her for a long time -- the things they say are so unfair. And actually, she's been apologized to, as you know, by various media because they said things that were lies.

I'll just tell you this. I think she's going to be a fantastic first lady. She's going to be a tremendous representative of women and of the people. And helping her and working her will be Ivanka, who is a fabulous person and a fabulous, fabulous woman. And they're not doing this for money.

They're not doing this for pay, they're doing this because they feel it; both of them. And Melania goes back and forth and after Barron finishes school -- because it's hard to take a child out of school with a few months left -- she and Barron will be moving over to the White House. OK, thank you, that's a very nice question.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Go ahead. QUESTION: Mr. Trump?

TRUMP: Yes, oh, this is going to be a bad question, but that's OK.

QUESTION: It doesn't(ph) have(ph) to be a bad question.

TRUMP: Good, because I enjoy watching you on television. Go ahead.

QUESTION: Well, thank you so much. Mr. President, I need to find out from you, you said something as it relates to inner cities. That was one of your platforms during your campaign. Now you're --

TRUMP: Fix the inner cities.

QUESTION: -- president. Fixing the inner cities.

TRUMP: Yep.

QUESTION: What will be that fix and your urban agenda as well as your HBCU Executive Order that's coming out this afternoon? See, it wasn't bad, was it?

TRUMP: That was very professional and very good.

QUESTION: I'm very professional.

TRUMP: We'll be announcing the order in a little while and I'd rather let the order speak for itself. But it could be something that I think that will be very good for everybody concerned. But we'll talk to you about that after we do the announcement. As far as the inner cities, as you know, I was very strong on the inner cities during the campaign.

I think it's probably what got me a much higher percentage of the African American vote than a lot of people thought I was going to get. We did, you know, much higher than people thought I was going to get. And I was honored by that, including the Hispanic vote, which was also much higher.

And by the way, if I might add, including the women's vote, which was much higher than people thought I was going to get. So, we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities, having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible -- you know, it takes a long time.

It's taken more a hundred years and more for some of these places to evolve and they evolved, many of them, very badly. But we're going to be working very hard on health and healthcare, very, very hard on education, and also we're going to be working in a stringent way, in a very good way, on crime.

You go to some of these inner city places and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people -- and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it -- in fact, in two cases I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day.

They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So, we're going to be very, very strong. That's a great question and -- and it's a -- it's a very difficult situation because it's been many, many years. It's been festering for many, many years. But we have places in this country that we have to fix.

We have to help African American people that, for the most part, are stuck there. Hispanic American people. We have Hispanic American people that are in the inner cities and their living in hell. I mean, you look at the numbers in Chicago. There are two Chicagos, as you know.

There's one Chicago that's incredible, luxurious and all -- and safe. There's another Chicago that's worse than almost any of the places in the Middle East that we talk, and that you talk about, every night on the newscasts. So, we're going to do a lot of work on the inner cities.

I have great people lined up to help with the inner cities. OK?

QUESTION: Well, when you say the inner cities, are you going -- are you going to include the CBC, Mr. President, in your conversations with your -- your urban agenda, your inner city agenda, as well as --

TRUMP: Am I going to include who?

QUESTION: Are you going to include the Congressional Black Caucus and the Congressional --

TRUMP: Well, I would. I tell you what, do you want to set up the meeting?

QUESTION: -- Hispanic Caucus --

TRUMP: Do you want to set up the meeting?

QUESTION: No -- no -- no. I'm not --

TRUMP: Are they friends of yours?

QUESTION: I'm just a reporter.

TRUMP: Well, then(ph) set up the meeting.

QUESTION: I know some of them, but I'm sure they're watching right now.

TRUMP: Let's go set up a meeting. I would love to meet with the Black Caucus. I think it's great, the Congressional Black Caucus. I think it's great. I actually thought I had a meeting with Congressman Cummings and he was all excited. And then he said, well, I can't move, it might be bad for me politically. I can't have that meeting.

I was all set to have the meeting. You know, we called him and called him. And he was all set. I spoke to him on the phone, very nice guy.

QUESTION: I hear he wanted that meeting with you as well.

TRUMP: He wanted it, but we called, called, called and can't make a meeting with him. Every day I walk and say I would like to meet with him because I do want to solve the problem. But he probably was told by Schumer or somebody like that, some other lightweight. He was probably told - he was probably told "don't meet with Trump. It's bad politics."

And that's part of the problem in this country. OK, one more.

QUESTION: (inaudible)

TRUMP: No, no, one question. Two we can't handle. This room can't handle two. Go ahead, give me the better of your two.

QUESTION: (inaudible) ...not about your personality or your beliefs, talking about (inaudible), some of it by supporters in your name. What do you...

TRUMP: ...And some of it - can I be honest with you? And this has to do with racism and horrible things that are put up. Some of it written by our opponents. You do know that. Do you understand that? You don't think anybody would do a thing like that. Some of the signs you'll see are not put up by the people that love or like Donald Trump, they're put up by the other side and you think it's like playing it straight?

No. But you have some of those signs and some of that anger is caused by the other side. They'll do signs and they'll do drawings that are inappropriate. It won't be my people. It will be the people on the other side to anger people like you. OK.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Go ahead, go ahead.

QUESTION: You're the president now. What are you going to do about it?

TRUMP: Who is that? Where is that?

QUESTION: What are you going to do about - what are you going to do about (inaudible).

TRUMP: Oh, I'm working on it. I'm working on it very - no, no, look. Hey, just so you understand, we had a totally divided country for eight years and long before that. In all fairness to President Obama, long before President Obama we have had a very divided - I didn't come along and divide this country. This country was seriously divided before I got here.

We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked, I thought it was a very good question was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education, we're going to work on - you know, we're going to stop - we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials, we're going to try and stop crime.

We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime. But it's very important to me - but this isn't Donald Trump that divided a nation. We went eight years with President Obama and we went many years before President Obama. We lived in a divided nation. And I am going to try - I will do everything within my power to fix that. I want to thank everybody very much.

It's a great honor to be with you. Thank you. Thank you very much, thanks.The power of the presidency looks much grander from the perspective of the campaign trail than it does from the White House. Once a president is in office, he is confronted with the power of the other branches of government, Congress and the courts as well as the multitude of institutions and political actors, from reporters to grass-roots activists, who can cause problems for any administration.

Historically, we see presidents adjust to the realities of governing. This has been a truism in American politics, often to the chagrin of campaign supporters who believe that the president, by adjusting his agenda, is abandoning promises and core principles. But the best presidents often learn that it is only through compromise, pragmatic adjustment and flexibility that one can be successful in our system of separated power.

The question is whether President Donald Trump will make this shift.

There are a number of times when new presidents, who tend to be bold and ambitious, are forced to make adjustments once their term starts. One of the most important reasons has been that elections are not really mandates in the United States (so the losers still hold on to some sources of power).

President John F. Kennedy entered office promising a new era, but much of his domestic agenda remained dormant throughout his term given the power of conservative Southern Democrats in Congress. "The fact is I think the Congress looks more powerful sitting here than it did when I was there in the Congress," Kennedy said in 1962.

Despite all the drama of the 1980 election, President Ronald Reagan still had to contend with a Democratic House throughout his presidency. Every time he tried to move domestic policy to the right, cutting welfare and dismantling programs, he encountered resistant majorities that forced him to curtail his ambition.

JUST WATCHED DOJ files appeal to travel ban suspension Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH DOJ files appeal to travel ban suspension 01:15

President Bill Clinton moved to the center as congressional Republicans regained control of Congress in 1994.

President Barack Obama promised in 2008 to redirect our national security programs fundamentally, but he ended up backing away from closing Guantanamo, escalating our military operations through drone strikes and leaving much of the post-9/11 counterterrorism program in place.

Circumstances also can change dramatically, and presidents have to change with them. Franklin D. Roosevelt campaigned promising to be a fiscal conservative and keep federal budgets low. But the severity of the Great Depression and the need to boost consumer demand gradually led him to loosen some of those ambitious and open up the nation's purse strings so to pump prime the markets.

Richard Nixon promised in 1968 to bring an end to the Vietnam War. His ability to do so was limited. Although he would start to pull American forces out of the conflict, leaving the South Vietnamese to do more of the fighting themselves, he continued a brutal and massive bombing campaign against the North Vietnamese that would lead to a national outcry against his duplicity.

George W. Bush campaigned by famously lashing out against Clinton's proclivity for nation-building and promised to limit US involvement in the world. But then the horrors of 9/11 took place. Bush responded by vastly expanding the national security apparatus and involving US military forces in two major military conflicts.

Presidents also change because they learn on the job. The wisdom of governance comes from having a full sense of the issues facing the nation and a better grasp of intelligence -- both national security and domestic challenges -- where they move away from some of the bluster that was used when campaigning.

Jimmy Carter promised to transform the way that American politics worked but in the end had to work with congressional Democrats who were essential to any legislative victories. George H.W Bush swore that he would never raise taxes in 1988. But when push came to shove and he was dealing with the urgent need to reduce the deficit from the Oval Office, he conceded, angering the right and working with Democrats on a package that raised revenue. Though they were one-term presidents, their respective accomplishments on the Camp David peace accord and deficit reduction are considered impressive.

There are a few signs that Trump might be shifting on some issues . Scratch beneath the surface of the Twitter blizzard and we have seen him back away from Taiwan, send mixed signals on Israeli settlements and offer some indications that it won't be possible to dismantle the Iran nuclear deal.

Still he has a long way to go. Overall, he is sticking to the script from the campaign trail and insisting he won't move away from his core promises. This is what his supporters want. He promised to stop the flow of refugees and that is what he is trying to do. The refusal by an appellate court to reinstate the ban on refugees was a blow to the administration's policy agenda. Trump was checked, and he is being forced to come up with a game plan for responding. But he hasn't backed off his message that refugees pose a threat to US national security, even though the evidence suggests otherwise.

He said he would build a wall on the Mexico border, and he is trying to find money to do just that. When Republicans started warning that people were dependent on the Affordable Care Act, he has insisted that even if it might take longer than he thought, the ACA will go.

Trump has no interest in changing. As one article in Politico concluded, "In interviews, nearly two dozen people who've spent time with Trump in the three weeks since his inauguration said that his mood has careened between surprise and anger as he's faced the predictable realities of governing."

While this might play extremely well with his base of support, it is a model of presidential leadership that is bound to run into trouble.

The courts have already offered Trump the first check and balance. Mass protests have also greeted his decisions and presidency, generating a formidable opposition movement that shows no signs of abating. Congressional Democrats are using what power they have to slow down and delay him. The question is whether and when some Republicans might start to take a stand against Trump, not just with their words but with their votes.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

Lyndon Johnson always used to talk about the limits of presidential power. From his long time on Capitol Hill, he felt that Congress would get the best of any president at some point. In fact, Johnson was a president who paid a steep price for refusing to change.

Although he campaigned in 1964 promising to be tough against communism, without going as far as his opponent Barry Goldwater, he refused to change course when officials such as Sen. Richard Russell and Vice President Hubert Humphrey warned him in 1965 that the Vietnam War was a mistake. Instead he got the nation deeper and deeper into a quagmire that eventually undid him and had disastrous consequences.

If Trump refuses to adjust and recalibrate on some key issues, there will be a tipping point where he can't overcome the institutional limits of his power, particularly given his weak standing in the national polls. When that point comes remains unclear, but history does suggest that even the most imperial presidency, such as that of Nixon, can ultimately be stopped.Timothy Calkins is clinical professor of marketing at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management and the author of " Defending Your Brand: How Smart Companies Use Defensive Strategy to Deal with Competitive Attacks. " The views expressed here are his.

(CNN) Donald Trump is taking a battering from all sides. He has started his term with historically low approval ratings, and the first few weeks of his administration have brought controversy and chaos. Late night talk show hosts are attacking his new administration with jokes that are both funny and pointed. Not all of the humor is good natured; some of it is sarcastic and biting. Political leaders around the world are pushing back against some of his policies, and Americans are protesting them in the streets.

All of this is not good for the Trump brand, which only two years ago was synonymous for many with success, luxury, wealth, and elegance -- so much so that his children had successfully leveraged it to foster ventures in the wine and fashion industries. Wearing a Trump branded suit made a statement. The brand didn't appeal to everyone, but it had a generally positive association. Today, however, the brand has a completely different meaning. It makes a very different statement, with associations of racism, sexism and xenophobia.

And now that statement is blowing back onto the Trump children's businesses too. Given the polarizing nature of the Trump brand, Nordstrom's decision last week to drop the Ivanka Trump line shouldn't come as a surprise. It's a reflection of the state of the whole Trump brand today.

Nordstrom claims that the decision was driven purely by sales results. A company spokesperson explained the move , noting, "Each year we cut about 10 percent and refresh our assortment with about the same amount. In this case, based on the brand's performance we've decided not to buy it for this season."

I suspect Nordstrom's decision was a bit more complex, and that ultimately both results and branding played a role in phasing out the line. The Trump brand currently is so polarizing that Nordstrom was probably eager to drop it. The brand is too hot to handle. Nordstrom doesn't want to be seen as supporting the new administration strongly, a wise move given that some people intensely dislike the Trump brand.

On the other hand, Nordstrom doesn't want to be opposed to the Trump brand either. It is never smart to publicly provoke a president.

It is a very delicate balance, made all the harder when selling the line of products. By dropping the Trump brand due to sales trends, Nordstrom was simply attempting to back away from a conflict.

Of course, things are rarely simple when dealing with Donald Trump. He attacked Nordstrom on Twitter, writing "My daughter Ivanka has been treated so unfairly by @Nordstrom. She is a great person ... terrible!" The situation grew even more fraught Thursday after the White House 'counseled' adviser Kellyanne Conway after she plugged Ivanka's line during a television interview.

Donald Trump is not the first president to defend his family. Back in 1950, music critic Paul Hume wrote a negative review of performance by President Harry Truman's daughter. Truman sent off a frosty letter on White House stationery : "Someday I hope to meet you. When that happens, you'll need a new nose, a lot of beefsteak for black eyes."

Still, Trump's habit of criticizing individuals and companies such as Nordstrom on social media raises the stakes for brand leaders.

It's worth dwelling on the flap between President Trump (as a father and a businessman) and Nordstrom, because more brands are following Nordstrom's lead . Most firms want to be politically neutral -- there is no reason to side with one party or the other and risk turning away customers. As Nordstrom noted in a November Twitter post, "We hope that offering a vendor's products isn't misunderstood as us taking a political position." Unfortunately, with the Trump brand, it is seen that way. Supporting Trump in any fashion is making a statement.

All of this means that the Trump brand, including the Ivanka Trump line, will have a challenging time going forward. For the Trump brand team, there are two keys for success with the Donald in the White House.

First, plan for a soft year. Assume sales will drop, so manage expectations down. Proactively make moves that might logically explain a sales drop, and scale back and conserve resources.

Second, work to reduce polarization. The Trump brand will rebound if it can get some early wins and become more broadly appealing.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

For retailers and licensees, it will be important not to be seen as taking a stand on the Trump brand. In most cases, this means just backing away from ties. The goal is not to be against Trump -- this can result in a Twitter attack from the President, which is not desirable (as Nordstrom experienced). The idea is to just not be seen as a supporter.

With retailers such as Nordstrom abandoning the Trump brand, it is clear that a repositioning is in order. Until then, most brands will keep a safe distance away.During a press conference, President Donald Trump said that he and his administration "inherited a big mess" in the US and abroad.At 24 years old, Jason Hairston thought he had made a life for himself in the NFL. Then a neck injury ended a career that included playing for the San Francisco 49ers and Denver Broncos.

Forced to start over, Hairston fell back on his lifelong passion for hunting.

As he spent more time in the mountains, he became increasingly frustrated with the gear he was forced to wear. It was too noisy, too heavy or simply the wrong color.

"We felt like we couldn't be the only ones that wished we had better performing products," Hairston said.

That's when he founded the hunting clothing brand, Sitka. After early success, Sitka ran into trouble when the economy crashed in 2008. The company was sold, and Hairston had to start over again  for a second time.

He launched another hunting gear brand, Kuiu, in 2010. Drawing on his experience from Sitka, he set out to create high quality performance gear sold directly to customers.

Hairston also created a crowdsourcing platform to involve customers in products from the outset so that Kuiu  pronounced "koo-you"  could give buyers exactly what they want.

"It's that connection (with customers) that makes Kuiu so powerful," he said.

That relationship has helped grow annual sales to $50 million.

Kuiu has attracted some famous clients too, including President Trump's sons, Eric Trump and Donald Trump Junior.

"I've actually had a unique opportunity to become friends with both of them and Don Junior and I are going on a hunting trip this coming summer," he said.

Metallica's James Hetfield has also wrapped one of his guitars in Kuiu's camouflage material.

"People just want to be associated with a cool brand -- hunting has never really had a cool brand to be associated with until now," Hairston said.

Hairston has big plans to grow his 34-person team and recently opened a small showroom in Spain. Kuiu also has representatives in New Zealand and Canada.

"There's a big opportunity in Russia and also in the South Pacific in New Zealand and Australia and we will take advantage of that as the demand continues to grow for our product line," he said.Mexico City (CNN) Mexicans took to the streets Sunday to air their grievances against President Donald Trump and to protest corruption in their home country.

Two separate demonstrations, which together drew an estimated 20,000 people, merged on Mexico City's main avenue, Paseo de la Reforma, in a march mostly focused on the new US President.

Marchers convened on the avenue near the US embassy, where riot police and barricades were staked out. A sea of Mexican flags and anti-Trump signs surrounded one of the city's main monuments, the Angel of Independence, a block from the embassy. One man burned a doll of Trump, drawing smiles from the crowd.

'Mexico has never been so threatened'

Some marchers wore shirts that read "Nasty Woman Keep Fighting."

"We are sending a message to Donald Trump: No wall. No immigrant raids. No aggression to Mexico," said Denise Dresser, a professor in Mexico City who made 350 of the shirts with donations. "Mexico has never been so threatened and never have we had a government so incompetent."

Denise Dresser, a university professor, made 350 of these shirts for the protest in Mexico City on Sunday, Feb. 12.

The march comes amid protests in the United States against Trump and the administration's deportations of undocumented immigrants as well as his executive order barring travelers from seven Muslim-majority nations from entering the country.

Trump argued Sunday that the deportations should come as no surprise. "The crackdown on illegal criminals is merely the keeping of my campaign promise," the President tweeted.

Speaking about Trump on Sunday, Mexicans young and old pulled no punches, saying the President's rhetoric towards women, Mexicans and Muslims is among their top concerns.

"He's pathetic. He's a very little man, and I'm sure he's insane," said protester Ines Carrasco, 25. "What concerns me most is that he's spewing hate."

Trump's treatment of undocumented immigrants was the prime complaint among the protesters. His plan to make Mexicans pay for a border wall has also drawn the ire of many here.

"No, you're going to pay for the wall," said Alberto Madero, 59, holding a sign that read "We will not pay for your [expletive] wall."

Beyond immigration, protesters were also concerned about the possibility of new taxes on Mexican goods and remittances , as well as the prospect of the United States withdrawing from a trade deal with Mexico

Some simply don't understand why Trump has focused so much of his criticism on Mexico.

"I'm worried about Trump. He's a racist, he's discriminating against us," said Ruben Rua, 58. "What have we done to the United States for them to treat us like this?"

Nearly 80% of Mexicans believe relations between the US and Mexican will be worse in the Trump era than during President Obama's term in office, according to a poll conducted last month by Mexican newspaper El Universal.

Photos: Anti-Trump protests hit Mexico City Mexicans took to the streets Sunday to air their grievances against President Donald Trump and to protest corruption in their home country. Two men in Mexico City hold a sign that reads, "Trump, give us Texas back." Hide Caption 1 of 5 Photos: Anti-Trump protests hit Mexico City Protesters march in Mexico City. Hide Caption 2 of 5 Photos: Anti-Trump protests hit Mexico City Protesters hold signs that read "Pe帽a Nieto is corrupt" and "Trump is crazy." Hide Caption 3 of 5 Photos: Anti-Trump protests hit Mexico City Protesters in Mexico City march behind a banner that says "You respect Mexico." Hide Caption 4 of 5 Photos: Anti-Trump protests hit Mexico City Protesters hold a banner that reads "#Friends, No Borders." Additional signs from left to right: "#friendship with no borders," "to govern you have to listen," "Less walls." Hide Caption 5 of 5

Anger against President Pe帽a Nieto

Some of the protesters were also marching against the Mexican government. President Enrique Pe帽a Nieto only has a 12% approval rating -- the lowest any Mexican President has had since polls were first collected in 1995.

Mexicans waved flags that read "Fuera Pe帽a" or "Pe帽a Out." Accusations of government corruption, coupled with anger over his handling of the disappearance of 43 Mexican students in 2014, have sunk his approval ratings. Protests against his administration have been a recurring event in the capital in recent months.

Also harming Pe帽a Nieto's popularity this year was his administration's decision to increase gas prices as much as 20% in January, as part of a plan to deregulate the energy sector.

The price hike -- dubbed 'el gasolinazo' -- sparked violent protests across Mexico, resulting in at least 1,500 arrests and six deaths in the first month of the year. Protests got so out of hand in Tijuana last week that US authorities decided to temporarily close the border.

Another price hike is scheduled for next week. The initial increase in gas prices triggered a ripple effect of higher prices for food and public transportation.

Mexican citizens in United States warned to 'take precautions'

Sunday's march also came as citizens are rallying behind a Mexican mother who was deported Thursday and separated from her two American children.

Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos was deported after a routine check-in with an office of the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement in Phoenix.

US immigration officials say there was nothing special about the case of Garcia de Rayos. Prior to Thursday, she had checked in with the immigration office seven times since a 2008 arrest for using a fake social security number.

Maria Eugenia Montes de Oca holds up a sign lambasting Trump as a "bad hombre."

On Friday, Mexico's foreign ministry warned its citizens in the US to "take precautions" and keep in touch with Mexican consulates in America, citing Garcia de Rayos as a cautionary tale.

"The case involving Mrs. Garcia de Rayos illustrates a new reality for the Mexican community living in the United States, facing the most severe implementation of immigration control measures," Mexico's Foreign Ministry said in a statement Friday.

On Sunday, marchers like Maria Eugenia Montes de Oca used Trump's own words to protest against him.

"Trump: Bad hombre for the whole world," Montes de Oca's sign read.

Flora Charner and Fidel Gutierrez contributed reporting to this storyMichael D'Antonio is the author of the new book "Never Enough: Donald Trump and the Pursuit of Success" (St. Martin's Press). The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) Having long ago committed himself to the proposition that there is no such thing as too much press, Donald Trump may be the most photographed, filmed and quoted man of our time.

Add his own words, offered in books, speeches, Facebook posts and Tweets, and you might conclude that there's little left for this man to share.

But think again. What if all those words were intended, not to reveal, but conceal? What if Trump talks so much because he wants to control the conversation?

Now that Trump is the GOP's presumptive nominee for president, he'll face more intense scrutiny about his many claims to personal success, his political beliefs, his temperament and his character. In each case, the public record is filled with incidents and examples, but a skeptic finds little clarity.

This state of affairs may suffice for anyone buying a steak or an apartment from Trump the salesman, but voters contemplating Trump the candidate for president deserve better answers to the lingering questions.

Here they are:

What is Trump's temperament?

TV audiences have been treated to more than 100 episodes of Trump's reality TV shows "The Apprentice" and "Celebrity Apprentice." The Trump depicted on air is the product of so much editing and consulting by producers and directors that it is no better than a cartoon. More useful is the cumulative Trump record, which includes as many negatives as positives.

Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 1 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 2 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 3 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 4 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 5 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 6 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 7 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 8 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 9 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 10 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 11 of 12 Photos: Trump campaign: 11 outrageous quotes Hide Caption 12 of 12

To Trump's credit, he has shown himself to be resilient, coming back from failures that would have sent less confident men and women into business exile. Most notable, of course, is the crisis he experienced in the early 1990s when he was unable to pay personal and corporate debts in the neighborhood of $3.4 billion

Trump is also a nimble entrepreneur, who looks for opportunities and seizes them decisively. Witness his ability to deal in real estate, entertainment and retail merchandising, all at the same time.

On the other side of the ledger, open questions remain about his consistent record of cruelty and excess when dealing with critics and competitors. Trump's code begins with the belief that he's justified in "hitting back ten times harder" whenever he's offended. If our presidents believed in this approach, America would have engaged in shooting wars with untold numbers of countries that have, in recent decades, committed transgressions against the United States.

Would Trump have hit back 10 times harder when North Korea detained the spy ship Pueblo? What about the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over the territory of our ally Ukraine. U.S. intelligence indicates a Russia missile likely was responsible. Would Trump have responded by downing 10 Aeroflot planes?

JUST WATCHED Keeping Them Honest: Trump on Afghanistan & gun control Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Keeping Them Honest: Trump on Afghanistan & gun control 03:48

We can ask additional questions about Trump's penchant for bullying. In some cases this trait has shown itself in mere words, as he has attempted to humiliate, disparage and marginalize others. In other instances he has sought to force innocent landowners off their properties to make way for his developments. This willingness to use any means necessary to get what he wants raises serious concern about Trump's ability to manage America's affairs in a complex world.

What does Trump believe?

More than any political figure in modern times, Trump represents an ideological puzzle. Although he now claims the conservative Republican mantle, he has often associated himself with liberal and Democratic Party ideas. In 1999 he told CNN, "I've actually been an activist Democrat and Republican."

In the past, Trump said he is "totally pro-choice." Now he is against abortion rights, recently musing about punishing women who might violate a ban on the procedure.

JUST WATCHED Trump flip-flops on abortion ahead of Wisconsin primary Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump flip-flops on abortion ahead of Wisconsin primary 02:02

In the past, Trump was in favor of levying a big tax on the rich , himself included, to pay down the federal deficit. Like banks, rich people have the money, and Trump reasoned that they could afford to help the country out. Today, Trump is in favor of big tax cuts for the wealthy.

In 2000 Trump proposed banning private ownership of assault weapons and increasing the waiting period for the purchase of guns. In the current campaign he has declared himself to be an ardent defender of gun rights, and he has even proposed eliminating gun-free zones near schools.

The list of Trump flip-flops is long and includes his positions on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and his regard for Hillary Clinton's performance as secretary of state. Voters, especially those conservatives who want a clear sense of what their standard-bearer will do as president, deserve explanations for these shifts.

How rich is he?

Throughout his life Trump has cited his wealth as evidence of his excellence but without offering verifiable proof of his claims. In the 1970s he cruised Manhattan in a chauffeured limousine and gave others the impression that he was in control of the $200 million fortune amassed by his father.

In the 1980s, when he first made it onto the Forbes magazine list of America's wealthiest men and women, Trump complained often and loudly about how his holdings were underestimated. More recently he said he is worth some $10 billion.

The record produced by those who have looked closely at Trump's finances raises many questions. Writer Wayne Barrett reported in the 1980s that Trump's income as of 1978 was less than $100,000. In the 1993 biography of Trump called "Lost Tycoon," Harry Hurt III noted that during his divorce from his first wife, Ivana, her attorneys found that Trump had never been worth the billions of dollars he claimed. Hurt also reported that in March 1992, Trump's own lawyers said he could not afford to pay Ivana even half of the $20 million he had offered as a settlement.

More recently doubts about his wealth arose in 2005 when journalist Tim O'Brien wrote that Trump was probably worth between $150 million and $250 million. For a man who reveled in his image as a billionaire, O'Brien's estimate was too much to bear. Trump sued. The case was dismissed by the trial judge. Trump appealed. He lost

Were Trump a more circumspect and well-mannered man, who never bragged about how rich he is, his wealth would be less of an issue. However Trump has made his fortune such an important part of his identity that voters deserve to know the truth. Many of the facts are contained in Trump's personal income tax filings, and it is now a campaign tradition for candidates to make these documents public. Clinton has made public all of her returns going back to 2000.

So far, Trump has refused to release his returns because, he says, he is undergoing an audit on returns filed in the last few years. Nothing in the law, or in federal regulations, would prohibit him from making the documents public now, but if he is uncomfortable with releasing those forms, he could simply match Clinton for those years that are settled.

Such a release would reassure the public that Trump is who he says he is -- a really rich man -- and allow a glimpse into other matters, including his charitable giving. It is a matter of conservative orthodoxy that the rich should be spared excessive taxation so they can support society freely with their philanthropy.

Is he a man of character?

Personality, which can be seen in a smile, heard in a glib remark or felt when viewing a performance, is not the most important measure of a man or woman. Many people with winning personalities are, in fact, hucksters, con men, manipulators and deceivers. In fact, the false signals flashed by well-practiced performers, including politicians, compel us to look for the signs of the character beneath the personality.

Experts in assessing character generally look for some traits such as autonomy and life purpose that Trump clearly possesses in abundance. But there are other areas of character , including positive relations with others, ethical behavior, empathy, honesty and humility where Trump would not achieve a very high score.

In his long and very public life, Trump has often shown he is willing to do things others consider wrong in order to get what he wants. This includes using a false identity to make claims about his success, carrying out a bitter divorce dispute in the tabloid press, criticizing the appearance of others and refusing to take the high road when offered the chance.

The most troubling aspect of Trump's character can be seen in his devotion to the so-called birther campaign that sought to delegitimize President Barack Obama. Despite all the evidence to the contrary, birthers led by Trump insisted that some mystery surrounded Obama's status as a citizen born in the United States.

Long after documents were produced to settle this falsely posed question, Trump continued to raise doubts and thus signal his allegiance to those who considered the President to be an unworthy "other." The racism latent in the birther movement was documented in a study by University of Delaware psychologist Eric Heyman, but the link to prejudice was always plain to see. Rather than stand against birtherism, Trump built a following by exploiting it.

In fact, one can find precedent for Trump's birtherism in his previous provocative statements about racially sensitive subjects. Other evidence of his character can be found in his selective use of facts, his tendency to inflame conflict rather than cool it and his devotion to self-promotion.

In the past Trump's character has been well-suited to his pursuit of success as he defines it. But as revealed thus far, it would disqualify him when it comes to the presidency. We can only hope Trump has something better to show and will do it when placed under the pressure of the coming campaign.Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Donald Trumps press conference on Thursday was one of his strangest yet. He argued with reporters, attacked the press, and even blamed Delta Airlines for some of his administrations early struggles. As I watched, I felt my jaw drop lower and lower as Trump said crazier and crazier things. From contradictions to conspiracy theories to literally just saying things that werent true, the presser felt like a new level of mania from a president whose first four weeks at the tiller have been gut-churning. Ive selected the top bizarre, irreconcilable, ridiculous moments from Trumps presser. You might want to pour yourself a drink first.

Its worth noting before we dive in that the purpose of the presser was to announce Trumps new nominee for Labor Secretary, Alexander Acosta, who was selected after Trumps first pick, fast food CEO Andrew Puzder had to withdraw his nomination. But the focus of the hour-long press conference definitely wasn't on either Acosta or Puzder; instead, the reporters pressed upon the other major problems plaguing the nascent Trump administration, including attempting to get a straight answer on Russia and asking for more information on the failed Muslim travel ban. In the end, it was a strange, strange conference. Here are the best, worst, and most insane bits.

Trump Claimed He Had The Biggest Electoral College Win Since Reagan

Trump says he had "the biggest electoral college win since Ronald Reagan".



His margin was less than Bush 41, and both Clinton & Obama wins. pic.twitter.com/c5dwbiLA9l  Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) February 16, 2017 Source: Kyle Griffin on Twitter

Amazing because of its audacity and easy fact-checkableness, a reporter was able to follow-up on this within the same press conference. Trumps response: I was given that information.

Hillary Clinton Was Mentioned More Often Than His Own Labor Secretary Nominee

President Donald Trump on Wikileaks: "Nobody mentions that Hillary received the questions to the debates" https://t.co/Qs32lFeVOR  CNN Politics (@CNNPolitics) February 16, 2017 Source: CNN Politics on Twitter

Donald Trump defeated Hillary Clinton and became the President of the United States, but the way he talks about it, hes still in the trenches. He brought her up in response to Russia, Wikileaks, and, of course, her e-mails. But strangest of all was his repetition of an unproven story that she gave 20% of American uranium to the Russians:

We had Hillary Clinton give Russia 20 percent of the uranium in our country. You know what uranium is, right? This thing called nuclear weapons like lots of things are done with uranium including some bad things.

By the end of it, Clinton had more screen time than Acosta.

But You Know Whos Real Nice? Putin.

While denying he has anything to do with Russia, Trump makes sure to thank Putin for being so nice to him.  Aanda (@GrnEyedMandy) February 16, 2017 Source: Aanda on Twitter

Trump was all a-flutter like a teenage girl talking about getting a phone call from her crush:

President Putin called me up very nicely to congratulate me on the win of the election. He then, called me up extremely nicely to congratulate me on the inauguration, which was terrific.

I'm just going to leave this here:

"Does anybody really think Hillary Clinton would be tougher on Russia than Donald Trump?"



Well, one person was pretty sure. pic.twitter.com/aSpyIZTGWO  Josh Barro (@jbarro) February 16, 2017 Source: Josh Barro on Twitter

Joked (?) That He Made Sure His New Labor Secretary Nominee Wasnt Related To CNNs Jim Acosta

Its hard to choose which reporter Trump seems to have the most acrimonious relationship with, but it may very well be CNNs Jim Acosta, who, you may have noticed, shares a surname with Trumps new pick for Labor Secretary.

TRUMP: And you're not related to our new...

ACOSTA: I am not related, sir. No. I do like the sound of Secretary Acosta, I must say.

TRUMP: I looked  you know, I looked at that name. I said, wait a minute, is there any relation there? Alex Acosta.

ACOSTA: I'm sure you checked that out, sir.

TRUMP: OK. Now I checked it  I said  they said, "No, sir." I said, "Do me a favor, go back and check the family tree."

All in good fun, right? Note that this is just after Trump upgraded CNN from fake news to Very fake news, so maybe joshing about Acostas family tree right after calling him dishonest isnt the chummy banter you were looking for.

Trump Said Mike Flynn  Who He Forced To Resign  Didnt Do Anything Wrong

As I read Trump's first answer on Flynn, I'm still confused as to why Trump asked for his resignation: pic.twitter.com/UuLGcUZKOw  Sopan Deb (@SopanDeb) February 16, 2017 Source: Sopan Deb on Twitter

How to get from Why did you fire Mike Flynn to YOU GUYS MADE ME DO IT in two small paragraphs:

Mike Flynn is a fine person, and I asked for his resignation. He respectfully gave it. He is a man who there was a certain amount of information given to Vice President Pence, who is with us today. And I was not happy with the way that information was given. He didn't have to do that, because what he did wasn't wrong  what he did in terms of the information he saw. What was wrong was the way that other people, including yourselves in this room, were given that information, because that was classified information that was given illegally. That's the real problem.

Hes Also The Least Anti-Semitic Person Youve Seen In Your Entire Life

In a very strange and testy exchange with a Jewish reporter from Ami Magazine, in which the reporter attempted to ask about an uptick in anti-Semitic events in the past few weeks, Trump trampled over the question and decided to pick a fight with him.

Sit down, I understand the rest of your question. So heres the story, folks. Number one, I am the least anti-Semitic person that youve ever seen in your entire life. Number two, racism. The least racist person, in fact we did very well, relative to other people running as a Republican.

What is this, I cant even.

By the way, guess what this least racist person did later on in the press conference?

He Asked A Black Journalist If She Was Friends With The Congressional Black Caucus

Trump just asked a black journalist if she was "friends" with the Congressional Black Caucus and wanted to set up a mtg for him w/ the CBC. pic.twitter.com/whnDJLI8MI  Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) February 16, 2017 Source: Kyle Griffin on Twitter

This may be the most outrageous exchange in a very outrageous press conference. Here's Trump talking with reporter, April Ryan.

RYAN: Are you going to include the Congressional Black Caucus and the Congressional Hispanic Caucus  ?

TRUMP: Well, I would, I'll tell you what, do you want to set up the meeting?

RYAN: No, no, no, I'm just a reporter 

TRUMP: Are they friends of yours? Set up the meeting.

This one makes me so mad I cant even explicate it, but fortunately the Congressional Black Caucus was quick with their response:

As I scrape my brains that have been splattered across the information superhighway, I feel like perhaps the most effective thing I can do is start a Kickstarter where people can chip in to buy the members of the White House Press Corps very expensive glasses of whiskey.The CEO of Boeing has the ear of President Trump.

Once a target of Trump's Twitter ire, the company has risen to significant influence inside the Trump White House.

"We've got a voice at the table," chief executive Dennis Muilenburg told media and company analysts last month.

On Friday, Trump will be the first sitting president to visit Boeing (BA)'s fast-expanding campus in North Charleston, South Carolina, where he will attend the unveiling of Boeing's new 787-10 Dreamliner.

It will be the third meeting between Trump and Muilenburg since the president's election. They had previously met at Mar-a-Lago and Trump Tower before the inauguration. They have spoken on the phone about a half dozen times, according to people familiar with the calls.

"We've had the privilege of having a very open dialogue with him on business issues," Muilenburg said on the earnings call. He said Boeing is "very supportive" of Trump's plans on manufacturing, trade, regulation and taxes. The company is "very confident that those are headed in the right direction and being done with the right tone and tenor."

Related: Boeing workers in South Carolina overwhelmingly reject union

In the less than four weeks since taking office, Trump has moved closer to Boeing's interests on several key issues.

The president has declared his support for the U.S. Export-Import Bank and reaffirmed a "one China" policy. His press secretary has signaled the administration will likely support U.S. expansion plans by Norwegian Air Shuttle -- despite the objections of U.S. airlines and their unions. Norwegian Air is a big buyer of Boeing planes.

There are still major issues on Trump's agenda without resolution that affect Boeing, including tax reform and whether or not to review a treaty that allows airlines in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates unfettered access to the U.S.

Boeing CEOs often work closely with presidents. Muilenburg's predecessor chaired President Obama's Export Council -- but Muilenburg's access to Trump has been extraordinary for a corporate leader.

During his January 17 visit to Trump Tower, Muilenburg was allowed to listen in to part of a call between Trump and Lt. General Christopher Bogdan. Bogdan is responsible for the Pentagon's F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program. The F-35 is made by Lockheed Martin (LMT) and is a competitor of Boeing's F/A-18 Super Hornet.

Related: Boeing pitches China facility as Trump-friendly

At the time of the call, Trump was threatening to buy Boeing Super Hornets as leverage against Lockheed in pricing negotiations for 90 F-35s. Bloomberg News first reported details of the call.

Bogdan, testifying to Congress on Thursday, downplayed the significance of the call. "There were no decisions made during those conversations, and it was my belief that President-elect Trump at the time was attempting to gain more information about the F-35's capabilities, relative to the Super Hornet," Bogdan said.

Boeing's contacts aren't limited to the Oval Office. Boeing staffers have had numerous meetings with Defense Department and White House contacts at all levels in recent weeks, according to one of the familiar people.

From their first meeting on December 21 in Mar-a-Lago, Muilenburg has been effusive in his praise of Trump's agenda. Muilenburg told reporters: "It was a terrific conversation. Got a lot of respect for him. He's a good man. And he's doing the right thing."

The White House did not respond to a request for comment.

Related: Trump & Boeing - It's about China

Boeing, like many companies, woke up on November 9 to an unexpected political landscape. The company had been preparing for a Clinton presidency. Timothy Keating, its long-time senior VP of government operations, served under President Bill Clinton. There was even internal discussion at Boeing that Keating might join a new Clinton administration, according to several Boeing staffers.

Early on, some of Trump's policy pronouncements unnerved Boeing. Trump took a congratulatory phone call from Taiwan's president and risked disrupting business relations with China -- Boeing's biggest single jetliner customer.

Boeing was then blindsided on December 6 when Trump tweeted, "Boeing is building a brand new 747 Air Force One for future presidents, but costs are out of control, more than $4 billion. Cancel order!"

Boeing is building a brand new 747 Air Force One for future presidents, but costs are out of control, more than $4 billion. Cancel order!  Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 6, 2016

Trump scolded Boeing on the new presidential transport. "I think it's ridiculous," Trump said. "I think Boeing is doing a little bit of a number. We want Boeing to make a lot of money, but not that much money."

Within hours, Muilenburg was on the phone with Trump for the first time, congratulating the president on his election win, committing to control the jet's cost and extending an invitation to Trump to visit its factories, according to one person familiar with the call.Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Story highlights Dean Obeidallah: Baldwin's much-touted appearance as host on SNL wasn't all about his portrayal of Trump

SNL gave airtime to portrayals of key Trump administration staffers and made some great political comedy, he writes

Dean Obeidallah, a former attorney, is the host of SiriusXM radio's daily program "The Dean Obeidallah Show" and a columnist for The Daily Beast. Follow him @deanofcomedy. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) Saturday Night Live is clearly no longer content to just comically fillet Donald Trump. As we saw again in this Saturday night's episode, they are increasingly going after key members of his staff. And if recent media reports are accurate, this seems to be rattling Trump and causing dissension within his administration.

Dean Obeidallah

When I worked on the production staff of SNL for eight seasons, we never knew if the politician or the celebrity the show would be mocking that weekend would be watching. But of course with Donald Trump, we do know. It appears he can't help hate-watching the show. Trump has taken to Twitter on multiple occasions to slam the iconic comedy show, even demanding back in October that it be canceled because he was outraged by the way Alec Baldwin and the show depicted him.

Baldwin hosted the show this past Saturday, and if the sole goal of SNL was to drive Trump to Twitter to lash out, they could've featured many sketches with Baldwin lambasting the President. After all, Trump offers comedians an abundance of material. But instead, the show made a decision to focus more on key members of his administration like Sean Spicer and Kellyanne Conway.

The show opened with Melissa McCarthy reprising her hilarious role from last week as Spicer. This time Spicer tried to remain in control but as time went on he lost it. Soon Spicer was hawking goods for Ivanka Trump's clothing line, which Nordstrom pulled this week for poor sales. And Spicer even comically commented on the racist underpinnings of Trump's "extreme vetting" plan by using a white Barbie doll who easily walks by TSA security agents before a brown skinned "Moana" doll is immediately subjected to a pat down.

Assuming the media reports are accurate that last Saturday's SNL depiction of Spicer got under Trump's skin since a woman was playing Spicer, then the next moment of the cold open must really have angered Trump. That's when his newly sworn-in Attorney General, Jeff Sessions, entered the sketch, played by the amazing Kate McKinnon. And she delivered a great comic line, touching on Session's alleged racist past, "We all know there are two kinds of crime...regular and black."

Read MoreMunich, Germany (CNN) Sending US ground troops to Syria to fight ISIS will fan flames of extremism in the region that will impact the security of the whole world, Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif told CNN's Christiane Amanpour Friday.

He also said that the agreement with Iran to limit its nuclear program -- brokered in 2015 by the US, Iran and five other world powers -- will stay in place, despite noises to the contrary from members of US President Donald Trump's administration.

Speaking on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference, Zarif said there was an international consensus not to let the agreement -- which took two years to negotiate -- unravel.

"I believe everybody, including experts in the United States, know this was the best deal possible for all concerned, not just Iran but the US too," he said.

"It was a triumph of diplomacy over coercion, because coercion doesn't work any more."

No to US soldiers in Syria

Regarding Syria, where Iran is in alliance with Russia in supporting the government of President Bashar al-Assad, the 57-year-old Iranian diplomat said it was the US "occupation" of Iraq that had created ISIS.

Zarif claimed that a nationwide ceasefire in Syria -- brokered by Russia and Turkey in December -- was largely working, and said that sending US soldiers to fight ISIS would add fuel to the fire.

"We cannot commit to solutions that are part of the problem," he said. "I believe that the presence of foreign troops in Arab territory is a recipe for those extremists to rally behind and gain new fighters from disenfranchised youth."

Regarding the global effort to destroy ISIS, Zarif pointed out that Trump himself had accused then-President Barack Obama of creating ISIS , and repeated criticisms of the US policy to arm opposition groups in Syria.

Trump's new sanctions

Shortly after Trump took office, the White House put Tehran "on notice," applying sanctions on 25 individuals and companies connected to Iran's ballistic missile program and those providing support to Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps' Quds Force.

Iran is playing with fire - they don't appreciate how "kind" President Obama was to them. Not me!  Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 3, 2017

Zarif said that sanctions won't work with Iran.

"Everybody (in) the past who has tested Iran know we don't respond well to threats. We respond well to mutual respect and mutual interests."

Zarif said the Obama administration tried to use economic sanctions to curtail Iran's nuclear program, but eventually failed, with Iran increasing their number of nuclear centrifuges tenfold in that period.

"The reason Obama came to the negotiating table was because sanctions did not work," Zarif told CNN.

Travel ban an 'affront' to Iran

Zarif said Trump's proposed, but currently stalled, travel ban on seven mainly Muslim countries including Iran "was an affront to the entire nation."

"You cannot find any Iranian who has committed a single act of terror against Americans, in any of these atrocities that have taken place," he said. "Iran has always condemned every single terrorist incident in the United States since 9/11."

Zarif said the ban was a departure from previous US policy that took issue with the government but not the Iranian people, and added that Iranians were among the most successful immigrants to the US.

"They (the US) don't understand in a globalized world you cannot contain threats to one locality. Syria is now a training ground for terrorists creating havoc everywhere," Zarif said.

Why support Assad?

Amanpour asked the Iranian Foreign Minister why Tehran chose to intervene in Syria on behalf of President Assad. "There are 500,000 people dead, there are twelve million refugees, there is torture, there is mass hanging -- it is not my impression, those are the facts," she said.

"Mistakes were made in Syria, as in the past mistakes have been made," he replied. "The same people who armed Daesh [ISIS], armed the terrorist groups, were the same people who armed Saddam Hussein, were the same people who created and armed al Qaeda."

"We should not continue to repeat history and then blame people who were on the right side."

Responding to a question about people fearing Iran -- partly because of its support for Hezbollah -- Zarif said the Lebanese Shia militia entered Syria on the request of Assad "to prevent these extremist forces (ISIS and other Sunni Islamist groups) from infiltrating into Lebanon, which would be a threat against all of us."Tim Holbrook is a professor of law at Emory University School of Law. He is a member of the boards of directors of the Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund and the Stonewall Bar Association of Georgia. The views expressed are his and his alone.

(CNN) There has been some uncertainty as to how President Donald Trump would treat the rights of members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer community. For example, during the Republican National Convention, President Trump became the first Republican presidential nominee to mention the LGBTQ community. Of course, he did so in a very narrow context -- protecting LGBTQ persons from terrorism by radical Islamists.

The President noted that Caitlyn Jenner was welcome to use the bathroom of her choice in Trump Towers. He also stated the issue of same-sex marriage is "settled."

These statements could be viewed as a gesture by Trump to be more inclusive to the LGBTQ community. In contrast, his choices of Vice President Michael Pence and Attorney General Jeff Sessions were viewed as troubling, because both Pence and Sessions have opposed LGBTQ rights.

The Trump administration showed its hand on Friday, when the Department of Justice withdrew its request that a Texas district court lift its stay in a case dealing with access to bathrooms for transgender students. The Obama administration had issued guidance that schools should permit transgender students to use bathrooms that correspond with their gender identity. The Texas court blocked implementation of this approach.

JUST WATCHED Trump campaign website offers 'LGBTQ for Trump' shirts Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump campaign website offers 'LGBTQ for Trump' shirts 08:46

Under the Obama administration, DOJ had asked the appellate court to reject the stay. The Trump DOJ has withdrawn support, removing its backing for these transgender students. It turns out the Trump DOJ, under Attorney General Jeff Sessions, is not a friend to the LGBTQ community.

This move may be a harbinger. Across the country, there are a number of lawsuits arguing that federal law should prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. During the Obama administration, most of these lawsuits had the backing of the DOJ, Department of Education, and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Part of the arguments in these cases is that the courts should give deference to these agencies' interpretations of the relevant federal civil rights statutes.

For example, the Supreme Court is scheduled to hear arguments in Gloucester County School Board v. G.G. on March 28. The lower court determined that a trans boy should be able to use the boys' restroom in his public high school. One of the issues the Supreme Court is addressing is whether courts should afford such deference to these types of agency pronouncements.

If the Trump administration changes its position in the case, it may remove that issue from the case and, seemingly, could tip the case against the transgender student. DOJ's action in the Texas case strongly suggests it will no longer support the trans student.

Similarly, a case out of Indiana is pending before a federal court of appeals, addressing whether federal anti-discrimination laws protect gays , lesbians and bisexuals against discrimination based on their sexual orientation. The EEOC has supported this position. Again, if the Trump administration alters its position on this issue, it could result in a loss to the LGBTQ plaintiff and a defeat for LGBTQ nondiscrimination protections.

The Texas withdrawal of the challenge to the stay is an ominous omen. It suggests the Trump administration will pivot away from protecting the civil rights of LGBTQ persons. The withdrawal of support may tip these cases against the LGBTQ litigants.

While losses in these cases would be detrimental, there is even more at risk, such as marriage equality. Trump, in his pre-inauguration "60 Minutes" interview, stated that marriage equality was "settled" under the Supreme Court's decision in Obergefell v. Hodges . But he has also promised to appoint justices who will overrule the over 40-year precedent of Roe v. Wade. Of course, justices opposed to Roe are likely to be opposed to the far more recent establishment of marriage equality.

The same objections that judges and justices opposed to Roe have made apply equally to marriage equality: They argue that the court has manufactured new "rights" that do not exist in the Constitution. Additionally, there can be considerable overlap among those opposed to abortion and same-sex relationships, particularly on moral and religious grounds. If a case gets to the Supreme Court with Trump-appointed justices, the court could reject marriage equality.

Such challenges to marriage equality will not be difficult to manufacture by the states. Tennessee has already introduced legislation again to ban same-sex marriage . Any judicial challenge could end up at the Supreme Court.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

At present, the broader threat to marriage equality is not as pressing. Even if Judge Neil Gorsuch is confirmed to the court, his presence will not change the court's political composition. The five justices who voted for marriage equality are still present, so, in the near term, marriage equality is safe. And it would be unlikely for the court to undo any existing same-sex marriages. But, if one of those five justices retires or dies, it is not difficult to fathom Trump appointing a justice who would be happy to overrule Obergefell.

The action by the DOJ in Texas on its face seems minor. In fact, it is quite revealing. LGBTQ rights will not be defended at the federal level. Those in favor of LGBTQ equality will need to defend themselves against efforts in states to ban the use of restrooms and to embrace so-called religious-liberty bills. The fight is now our own. We won't be able to look to this administration for help.(CNN) Univision anchor Jorge Ramos said Saturday that if Barack Obama was the "deporter in chief," then President Donald Trump "wants to be the deportation czar."

Trump is "criminalizing the immigrant population," Ramos told CNN's Michael Smerconish.

US Immigration and Customs Enforcement conducted multiple raids this week , its first concerted effort under the new administration to arrest targeted undocumented immigrants for deportation proceedings.

"I can't believe a President, who is the son of an immigrant, suddenly wants to close the door after those who came after him," Ramos said, referring to Trump's late mother, Mary Anne MacLeod, who was born in Scotland.

In particular, the case of Jeanette Vizguerra , an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who has been in the country 20 years, has received widespread attention. The mother of four children found out this week that a stay on her deportation order would not be extended. Worried she'd be arrested, she sought refuge at a church in Denver.

Asked about her by Smerconish, Ramos insisted, "She's just a mom."

"Let's not be naive, yes. They have been using fake IDs, fake Social Security numbers, fake drivers' licenses," Ramos continued, "but we are complicit in this."

Trump tweeted earlier this week that "(t)he crackdown on illegal criminals is merely the keeping of my campaign promise. Gang members, drug dealers & others are being removed!"

But Ramos said the estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants in the United States come "because of us."

"They don't come to go to Disneyland! They don't come here to kill American citizens; they come here simply to make their life better," Ramos said.

"They're harvesting the food that we eat, they're building homes where we live, baby-sitting our kids. That's why they are here, Michael."

The solution, Ramos insisted, is for the President to find "a legal way" for undocumented immigrants to stay in the country, "but he doesn't want to do that."

"Barack Obama was the deporter in chief; he deported more than 2.5 million immigrants in this country," the TV anchor said. "But now it seems that then Donald Trump wants to be the deportation czar."Raul A. Reyes, an attorney and member of the USA Today board of contributors, writes frequently for CNN Opinion. The views expressed here are solely his.

(CNN) On Thursday, President Donald Trump held a bizarre news conference in which he railed against the media, Senate Democrats, and the intelligence community. He insisted his former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, had done nothing wrong. He falsely asserted that he had "the biggest electoral college win since Ronald Reagan." Oh, and he named his new nominee for secretary of labor, Alexander Acosta. That was supposedly his reason for holding the press conference, yet it took only a few sentences out of about 80 minutes.

Acosta, who is dean of Florida International University College of Law, may be one of the most solid of any of the nominees for Trump's Cabinet. He would also be the first Latino , and is certainly qualified for the job. The only question is: Why would Acosta want to join Trump's team?

Acosta does not have very much in common with Trump's first pick for Labor -- and that's a good thing. Acosta comes to his potential post with strong credentials . He is a graduate of Harvard. He has experience in the public sector, having served in the Department of Justice Civil Rights division. He served on the National Labor Relations Board.

This resume alone puts him head and shoulders above most of Trump's Cabinet choices, who often had little knowledge of their respective fields ( Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos ) or who seem to be at odds with the goals of the agencies they are slated to run (Attorney General Jeff Sessions has a poor record on civil rights). Acosta has even defended the rights of Muslim Americans to wear headscarves.

Most importantly, Acosta has already been through the confirmation process three times , so it is unlikely that his nomination will be doomed by such revelations as the allegations of domestic abuse against Puzder. Acosta is a safe and thoughtful pick; so much so that it is surprising Trump did not choose him first.

The only possible reason that Acosta was not Trump's first draft -- his heritage -- is now shaping up to be one of his strongest assets. The son of Cuban immigrants, Acosta will bring a much-needed Latino perspective to Trump's inner circle.

Yet given Trump's apparent disdain for Latinos, Acosta's tenure will likely be fraught with risk. Consider that Trump barely spoke of Acosta at the news conference that was ostensibly to announce his nomination. In fact, Trump mentioned Hillary Clinton more than he mentioned Acosta.

On the positive side, Alexander Acosta does not have any particularly scandalous or partisan positions in his personal history. He has won support from a range of Latino advocacy groups , both now and in the past.

The US Hispanic Chamber of Commerce called him an "outstanding choice" for labor secretary. The Hispanic National Bar Association congratulated Acosta on his nomination, noting that he "understands that our nation's diversity is our strength."

Back when he was named to head the Civil Rights Division at the Department of Justice, the National Council of La Raza called him a "bridge-builder" and "someone who will listen and act in a fair manner." With his strong labor and education background and potential support from Latino civic groups, Acosta's nomination could put Democratic senators in the awkward position of voting against a qualified Hispanic nominee -- to show their opposition to Trump.

True, Acosta is not perfect. His time at Justice was marked by a politicization of the Civil Rights Division. In 2007, McClatchy DC reported that, while serving as assistant attorney general, Acosta did not take issue with Ohio Republicans challenging 23,000 predominantly African-American voter registrations. We do not know his views on equal pay for equal work, or raising the minimum wage. And he is apparently willing to step into an administration that is widely viewed as hostile to Latinos and immigrants -- not to mention truth itself.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

There is no doubt that Acosta will be of service to Trump and the country. He will be an important voice for Latinos in the Cabinet. It remains to be seen, however, whether he can bring some integrity to this flailing, chaotic administration.White, Working-Class and Worried is a CNN partnership with the Kaiser Family Foundation - an extensive survey of white, working-class Americans and voters, who form a backbone of the support for Donald Trump. Watch Anderson Cooper 360 and CNN.com for reports throughout the week.

Washington (CNN) The white, working-class Americans who form a backbone of Donald Trump's political support have a split view of Muslim immigrants -- strong majorities believe both that immigrants from Muslim countries increase the threat of terrorism in the United States, but also that most immigrants from those countries are good people.

The data is from a new survey from CNN and the Kaiser Family Foundation and is aimed at unveiling the political motivations of the voting bloc that has propelled the GOP nominee.

Threats of terror, both abroad and at home, have repeatedly rolled the race for the White House and the candidates have sought to improve their standing with voters in their responses to the terror attacks in Paris, Brussels, San Bernardino, Calif., and most recently after the attacks in New York and New Jersey. Polls generally show that voters trust Trump more than Hillary Clinton to handle terrorism.

Trump's tough talk about combating terrorism and threats abroad, including a plan to erect a wall at the US-Mexico border and his repeated suggestion that profiling as a preventative tactic against terrorism has helped fueled his rise.

While a majority (63%) of white, working-class Americans say immigrants from Muslim countries are generally good people, the same share say that immigrants from Muslim countries increase the risk of terrorist attacks.

Members of this group, which exit polls had at around 44% of the US electorate in 2012 though the exact figure is difficult to quantify, also have a more negative view of immigration: nearly half (47%) of whites without a college degree view immigrants as a burden on the country.

Even among those white, working-class voters who view immigrants as a burden, 50% say immigrants from Muslim countries are good people compared with 35% who say they are not.

There is also a partisan divide: White, working-class Democrats are more likely to hold positive views about immigrants from Muslim countries than their white, working-class Republican counterparts. 47% of white Democrats without college degrees say Muslim immigrants increase the risk of terrorist attacks in the US compared with 83% of white Republicans with no college degree.

Trump has made his hard line against Muslims a key component of his campaign, and his white, working-class supporters have strong views about the impact of immigrants from Muslim countries. Fifty-three percent of white voters without college degrees who are considering supporting Trump say immigrants from Muslim countries are basically good, but 82% say they increase the risk of terrorist attacks in the US.

'Under attack'

More than 6-in-10 white, working-class Americans also say that Christian values are under attack in the United States. That viewpoint is more widespread among older working-class whites than among younger ones. Seventy-three % of white, working class adults 65 and older said Christian values are under attack, while just 41% of working-class adults under the age of 30 said the same.

Trump backers were more likely to say that Christian values were under attack than those who support Clinton. Eighty-one percent of white, working-class voters who would consider supporting him in November said Christian values were under attack, compared to 31% who support Clinton.

Candidate positioning

In the hours following the bombings in New York and New Jersey, Clinton and Trump tussled over who was better qualified to combat terrorism as well as its cause.

Clinton cast herself as the candidate best prepared to combat terrorism and said that her opponent's positions are "not grounded in fact" and "meant to make some kind of demagogic point."

"I am prepared to, ready to actually take on those challenges," the former secretary of state told reporters on Monday, "not engage in a lot of irresponsible, reckless rhetoric."

Trump blamed Clinton and President Barack Obama for failing to keep the country safe and called for profiling to beef up what he sees as currently lackluster anti-terrorism efforts. Instead of treading lightly, Trump said on Fox News Monday morning, the better approach would be to "knock the hell out of 'em."

"Our local police, they know who a lot of these people are," Trump told Fox. "They are afraid to do anything about it, because they don't want to be accused of profiling. And they don't want to be accused of all sorts of things."Story highlights CNN host Michael Smerconish criticized Trump's attacks on the press and defended journalists

"This is actually a golden age of journalism, one that makes me proud," he said

(CNN) After President Donald Trump tweeted that the media "is the enemy of the American people," CNN's Michael Smerconish delivered a searing defense of the press Saturday, arguing that this is "actually a golden age of journalism."

Trump's tweet came after a news conference Thursday ostensibly called to announce new labor secretary pick Alexander Acosta devolved into a tirade against the media. The press, the President said at one point, should be "ashamed of themselves."

Smerconish noted in his response to Trump's remarks that the President "uses every opportunity to bash us."

"On his media criticism, I vehemently disagree -- and not just because I'm here at CNN," he said. "The President is attacking of our best checks on government, especially where Congress shows no interest in playing that role."

Now more than ever, people should be investing in journalism and supporting press outlets, the CNN anchor said.

Read MoreOver the course of a 77-minute press conference Thursday filled with characteristic attacks on the press, President Donald Trump went out of his way to praise the "very honorable people" working at "Fox & Friends."

"They hit me also when I do something wrong, but they have the most honest morning show," Trump said during an exchange with CNN's Jim Acosta. "That's all I can say. It's the most honest."

The next morning, "Fox & Friends" showed why Trump likes it so much, reciprocating the president's praise and echoing his criticisms of the press.

Before he launched his presidential campaign,Trump was a weekly guest on the program, which has long been a reliable steward of the channel's conservative agenda. And with the possible exception of Trump pal Sean Hannity, no one at Fox News is a bigger cheerleader for the current administration than the three hosts of "Fox & Friends": Steve Doocy, Brian Kilmeade and Ainsley Earhardt.

Related: Trump attacks media in lengthy, combative press conference

On Friday's edition of the show, Earhardt said her "phone was blowing up" after Trump's shout out at the presser.

"I bet he was in a great mood after that press conference because people were saying, 'He's back,'" Earhardt said.

The three took turns directing their ire at the members of the media who had a more critical response. They showed a highlight reel of various commentators panning the president's performance, including former George W. Bush aide and ABC News political analyst Matthew Dowd, who said Trump looked "smaller" at the press conference.

"I don't think he looked smaller," Kilmeade scoffed. "Are you kidding me? He looked bigger than the -- I mean, he looked bigger than the superpower which he's representing."

"The mainstream media, they can't stand it," Earhardt said.

"Well, I think the headline from the Jim Acosta back-and-forth is that CNN is no longer 'fake news,' it's 'very fake news,'" Doocy said, repeating Trump's newly minted insult.

(The highlight reel did not include their own colleague, Fox News afternoon host Shepard Smith, who reacted to Thursday's press conference with a forceful rebuke against Trump's attacks on the media.)

Related: President Trump's exchange with CNN's Jim Acosta

"Fox & Friends" has been a ratings magnet for the channel. It has cycled through different co-hosts over the years -- including Gretchen Carlson, whose sexual harassment lawsuit against Fox News founder Roger Ailes led to his ouster last year -- all while consistently maintaining its title of the top morning program on cable news.

The show epitomized the channel's adversarial tone during Barack Obama's eight years in office; in 2012, the program ran a four-minute long video that resembled a campaign ad against the then-president.

"Fox & Friends" is now a central part of Trump's information feedback loop, often providing fodder for the president's pre-sunrise tweets, which in turn provide fodder for the show. "Fox & Friends" is no doubt a morning staple for many of Trump's supporters, too. A study released last month from Pew Research Center found that 40% of Trump voters said Fox News was their primary source of election news.

On Friday, the three co-hosts channeled Trump's anti-media tenor and mocked his enemies.

"The mainstream media is freaking out about the president's immigration plans and everything else," Doocy said at one point in the broadcast.

Around 7:30 a.m., the hosts conducted a largely softball interview with White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus, who said the "highest levels of intelligence officials" had assured him that a New York Times story earlier this week about alleged contacts between the Trump campaign and the Russian government was "grossly overstated and inaccurate." When Priebus complained that he spends half his days "putting out phony stories," Earhardt sympathized.

"It's like stop, let us work, let us clean up this country," she said.

It is rare to hear any of the three "Fox & Friends" hosts criticize Trump, despite his suggestion to the contrary. There were moments on Friday, however, when Kilmeade seemed to be advising the president through the television screen.

"He's got so much to do, why is he even watching Don Lemon at 10:00 on CNN," Kilmeade said, referring to the host who Trump attacked at the press conference without naming.

Earhardt defended the president's media obsession.

"But when most of the media is painting him in a bad light and not giving him a chance, as the president you would want to know that, you would want to watch it because you need to have your finger on the pulse," she said.

"But here's the thing about Donald Trump," Doocy chimed in, "television is his business."

"No, that's his old business," Kilmeade replied.April Ryan, an African-American reporter who asked President Trump a question about the CBC at a recent press conference, speaks with CNN's Don Lemon about her exchange with Trump.(CNN) So what will Donald and Melania Trump bring to the White House in the way of taste and style? Their triplex apartment atop Manhattan's Trump Tower has been described by British design critic Stephen Bayley as a "glitterball of rococo kitsch." Will this aesthetic lend itself to the neo-classical grand mansion at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue?

It's not unusual for the President and First Lady to add personal touches during their residencies.

Teddy Roosevelt hung stuffed animal heads in the State Dining Room. Jackie Kennedy famously renovated the State Rooms to celebrate the White House's decorative and architectural history.

The Clintons borrowed a Willem de Kooning late abstract and a cast of Rodin's "The Thinker."

Michelle and Barack Obama introduced an unprecedented roll call of 20th-century art , much of it American Abstract Expressionism, loaned from American museums or donated to the White House permanent collection -- Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg, Josef Albers, Sam Francis, Louise Nevelson and Alma Thomas, the first African-American woman to be represented in the White House.

Over the fireplace in the master bedroom, the Obamas hung a 19th-century nocturne painting by James McNeill Whistler.

In his 70 years, Donald Trump has rarely espoused a passion for any kind of art (aside from "Trump: The Art of the Deal," his 1987 book) although, according to the New York Times , he has seen "Evita" as many as six times on Broadway.

You could say Trump's buildings are his principal, almost primal idea of what art is. In 2013, he told the Washington Post "friends of mine, they spend these ridiculous amounts of money on paintings ... I'd rather do jobs like this (a new Washington Hotel), and do something really that the world can cherish."

He seems to like Impressionism -- or at least the Impressionist who prolifically celebrated feminine sensuality.

Both writer Mark Bowden and Nicole Bryl, Melania Trump's makeup artist, have reported that the Trumps own paintings by Pierre-Auguste Renoir.

Bowden wrote in Vanity Fair that, in 1996, Trump showed him around the gilded interior of his private jet and pointed out Renoir's signature on a painting; Trump didn't comment on the work, just its value -- "Worth $10 million," he reportedly said

In a 2012 blog for the Huffington Post , Bryl wrote about "the Trumps' golden sky palace/triplex" at Trump Tower, with "their majestic golden 'door' entrance, the crystal chandeliers, the marble floors, tables and bathrooms, the Renoir paintings and the panoramic floor to ceiling windows."

Trump has always liked marble and gold. As we all know, his brand is often spelled out in bold in gold -- on his hotels and towers, vodka, wine and eau de toilette and anything else he licenses.

For his first television interview as President-elect, he sat on a golden chair worthy of Louis XIV in Trump Tower.

Twentieth- and 21st-century art seems to have entirely passed Trump by. This is despite his eldest daughter, Ivanka, being an avid and visible collector . (Works by younger American artists like Dan Colen and Alex Israel have made appearances in the background of her Instagram posts.)

Now there is at least one artist Trump seems to have championed, not least because it appeared to be good for business: the billionaire court sculptor to the Russian elite, Zurab Tsereteli.

When Tsereteli's colossal sculpture of Christopher Columbus, "Birth of a New World," was freely offered to New York in the late 1990s, Trump was an enthusiastic advocate.

"It's got 40 million dollars' worth of bronze in it, and Zurab would like it to be at my West Side Yards development," Trump said in a 1997 New Yorker profile . "Zurab is a very unusual guy. This man is major and legit."

This was the Trump imprimatur. New York declined the gift along with five other American cities. The sculpture finally found a home in Puerto Rico last June.

When Trump has an aversion to art (or anything else), he is not one to mince his words. He took profound offense at the work of the Turner Prize-winning British artist, Chris Ofili. When Ofili's "The Holy Virgin Mary" (1996) was exhibited at New York's Brooklyn Museum in 1999, Trump joined Mayor Rudy Giuliani in roundly condemning it.

The painting shows a black Madonna on a gold background, wrapped in a robe but with her right breast of elephant dung exposed. The painting rests on two balls of the same dung.

Trump didn't hold back: "It's not art. It's absolutely gross, degenerate stuff," he said in a statement to the New York Daily News at the time.

The painting went on to sell at Christie's in London in 2015 for $4.5 million, making Ofili one of the most prized of living painters.

Trump and his first wife, Ivana, met with the pop artist Andy Warhol at his New York studio, the Factory, in 1981. Warhol wrote in his diary : "He's a butch guy. Nothing was settled, but I'm going to do some paintings anyway, and show them to them."

No slouch when it came to brand-making and self-promotion himself, Warhol did a series of eight silkscreen prints of Trump Tower he'd hoped would hang above the entrance to Trump's apartment, done in black, silver and gold with a sprinkling of diamond dust. But the Trumps did not buy them.

Warhol added to his diary: "Mr. Trump was very upset that it (the series of screen prints) wasn't color-coordinated."

He went on to write: "I think Trump's sort of cheap, though, I get that feeling."

Since his death in 1987, Warhol's works, two of which have sold for over $100 million, have become among the most expensive ever sold at auction. Perhaps the screen-prints of Trump Tower are worth several million today, likely to have risen sharply in value since the election.

It's been a tradition since George Washington for American presidents to sit for an oil portrait. We are still waiting to see President Obama's, but who will get to paint Donald J. Trump?

It's a fascinating challenge, to capture a man so loved and loathed, viewed by many as so thin-skinned and so polarizing. Just his hair -- that wondrous gossamer confection -- screams out for forensic examination by a master painter.

The great photo realist artist Chuck Close , who has painted both Clintons and works on a massive scale, is the obvious candidate but would he accept? We would be able to see every follicle, every blemish, every fold.

There are already a couple of known Trump oil portraits. Chas Fagan, a North Carolina artist, has painted every American President -- dead and alive -- for a touring exhibition sponsored by the American cable channel C-SPAN.

Since the election, Fagan has quickly added Trump to the show using photographs as reference. According to a statement, he opted for "a softer look into his face than we often get from public media photography." Like his immediate predecessors, Trump is framed within a golden oval.

There is also an oil portrait from the late 1989 hanging prominently in Trump's exclusive Mar-A-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida, which looks as if it's been dashed off for a Christmas card.

Trump stands tall, tanned, handsome and preppy in a cricket sweater, "his skin glowing like the top floors of Trump Tower at sunset," as Mark Bowden described it in a 1997 profile for Playboy magazine.

The portrait, entitled "The Visionary," was painted by a Palm Beach artist, Ralph Wolfe Cowan . Cowan has a reputation for flattering his sitters, who have included Elvis, Princess Grace of Monaco and Imelda Marcos.

Then in his early 40s, Trump was very pleased. Cowan, now in his mid-80s, is still accepting commissions. Would he be prepared to have another go?

Now let's be blunt: The Trump presidency will be extraordinary. None of us know quite what he's going to say, do or tweet next. Does he?

There has never been a thrice-married billionaire businessman/brand resident in the White House.

He will be living in a building that does not have his name in large gold capital letters emblazoned on the outside. Even if he demanded his logo on the south portico, surely they wouldn't allow, it would they? The White House is the executive residence, but thanks to Jackie Kennedy, it is also a de facto museum.Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Story highlights Mexicans flock to the sport of Lucha Libre, where good battles evil

Newest bad boy getting attention bears a striking resemblance to the US President

Mexico City (CNN) It's fight night in Arena Mexico, and the red and green stands are packed with fans. Some wear the masks of their favorite wrestling idols, while others play drums and noisemakers ringside.

Lucha Libre is a traditional pastime in Mexico City -- a place where crowds come to see good fight evil and where they can get just about anything off their chests. The fans shout tirades, even obscenities, against the bad guys in what's seen as collective stress relief.

JUST WATCHED Meet Mexico's pro-Trump wrestling villain Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Meet Mexico's pro-Trump wrestling villain 03:16

The lights dim and the announcer's voice comes over the loud speakers: the battle is about to begin. The heroes, or "tecnicos," enter first down a ramp to roaring applause. The bad guys, or "rudos," follow to be hissed and booed by the crowd.

And there's the new anti-hero on the scene: flowing blond hair, a deep tan and an American flag -- no villain is more despised than Sam Adonis, the "Donald Trump" of Lucha Libre.

Adonis, 27, hit the Lucha scene 10 months ago after nearly a decade of professional wrestling in the United States and Europe. More recently, the Pittsburgh native, born Sam Polinsky, saw a chance bring the ultimate "bad hombre" to the fans.

Read MoreStory highlights There are many reasons for people to think this still young presidency is off the rails, writes Julian Zelizer

Zelizer cites: His thin skin. His inability to separate fact from fiction. His continuing focus on his election victory margin

(CNN) "How would you feel if that was your boss?" and "How would you feel if that was someone in your family?" asked CNN's Jake Tapper after Thursday's news conference with President Donald Trump. Although at this point nothing should surprise anyone about how Trump conducts himself, it was still hard not to have your jaw drop as his face-off with reporters played across screens.

He lashed out personally against reporters, he resumed fighting over the outcome of the election and his loss in the popular vote, and continued steadfastly refusing to admit to facts that are beyond dispute. While it is true that many of his supporters still see the person who "tells it like it is" and isn't afraid to punch back against his critics, this is not a way to conduct the presidency.

The style that we saw on display at this news conference highlighted many parts of President Trump that are causing deep concern, certainly among Democrats, but also with some Republicans. When he continues to traffic in false statements about massive voter fraud, he demonstrates his willingness to circulate false information from the highest levels of power.

When he continues to insist he would have won the popular vote, if not for fraud, and that he enjoyed the biggest Electoral College victory since Ronald Reagan (which he was challenged on, and had no adequate reply), it is dangerous for the body politic and fuels support for legislation that could suppress the vote. He still seems obsessed with the Hillary Clinton email scandal, even as more and more stories about his own lax security practices are on the front pages of the news.

JUST WATCHED Trump: I'd love to meet with black caucus Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump: I'd love to meet with black caucus 01:10

Despite the flood of reports about the connections between the Russians and top members of his campaign, Trump did nothing to indicate he was taking this seriously and that he was bothered by what was revealed.

Read MoreA Nigerian economic and social rights group has written to the White House demanding the return of $500 million of stolen funds, which it claims are being held by the US.

"(We urge) the administration to attach and release to Nigeria some $500 million worth of US-based proceeds of corruption traced to former Nigerian dictator General Sani Abacha," the Socio-Economic Rights and Accountability Project (SERAP) wrote in an open letter

The letter cites US obligations as a signatory to the UN Convention Against Corruption, and demands that the government "promptly initiate civil asset forfeiture proceedings" to ensure that the funds are swiftly returned to Nigeria.

Following the money

General Sani Abacha was a notorious dictator who led Nigeria for five years after taking power in a 1993 coup. He is alleged to have stolen over $4 billion during his reign, before his death in 1998.

SERAP's claim is the latest in a series of attempts to recover lost wealth from Abacha and his family, which has been frozen in accounts and assets around the world.

Switzerland has recovered and returned around $700 million to Nigeria to date, with further sums pending. The US Department of Justice had already seized $480 million in 2014, prior to SERAP's new claim, although this has yet to be returned

General Sani Abacha seized power in a 1993 coup and reigned for five years.

The Nigerian government's focus is on reclaiming the funds it is due from these latter cases rather than the SERAP claim, says Professor Bolaji Owasanoye, Executive Secretary of the Presidential Advisory Committee Against Corruption.

Extracting the money from the US in particular has been a frustrating process for Nigeria.

"President Obama met with our President Buhari and made a commitment to return this sum to the government of Nigeria," says Owasanoye. "This has been subject to legal challenge, and the bureaucratic system in the US is hindering the return so far."

"Developed countries are very happy to recover money but very slow to return it," he adds.

The legal challenge comes from Godson Nnaka, a former attorney for the Nigerian government.

The US Department of Justice (DoJ) says that the appeal must be resolved before the funds can be returned to Nigeria.

'Lawyer's feast'

The Nigerian government will face further obstacles before recovering the money.

Some of the forfeited $480 million is located in banks outside the US, which will require an even more laborious process to recover.

"The US has to get court orders for those countries to physically move cash back to the US to go in the pot of seized assets," says Alexander W. Sierck, a Washington-based lawyer who has represented SERAP pro-bono for several years in their efforts to recover Abacha funds.

"It is a lawyer's feast that that generates a lot of work -- but it is a slow process."

A further complication is the DoJ's determination to avoid allowing repatriated funds to be lost to corruption a second time, often seeking safeguards.

In the landmark case of Equatorial Guinea, a haul of assets worth $30 million seized from the ruling Obiang family including property and sports cars was repatriated in the form of charitable trusts, partly overseen by the US. A similar deal was reached over proceeds of corruption from Kazakhstan.

Teodorin Nguema Obiang, Vice-President of Equatorial Guinea, agreed to a deal that allowed proceeds of corruption from the country to be repatriated through a trust partly overseen by the US.

The US Congress has discussed a bill that would see the Nigerian funds placed in a charity to support the victims of Boko Haram, but Nigeria is unlikely to accept such an arrangement.

"The US should not impose conditions," says Owasanoye. "They can monitor to the use of the funds -- we are transparent -- but we are a sovereign state and the money should be returned to us.

The need is particularly acute as Nigeria struggles through a period of recession, he adds, claiming the money will be used for a range of social welfare projects.

Fractions of fractions

The World Bank estimated in 2007 that developing countries lose up to $40 billion a year through corruption, and little is successfully reclaimed.

"What is being recovered is a fraction of a fraction," says Emile van der Does de Willebois, the Bank's global lead for financial market integrity and asset recovery. "Legal procedures take time and an enormous amount of resources."

"Of any number of corruption cases you can only focus on one or two...(and) it is up to prosecutorial authorities to make a judgement on what is the most important case."

The process is further complicated by problems with mutual legal assistance and co-ordination, says de Willebois, as "victim" states often lack expertise in how to deal with financial centers such as Switzerland and the US.

But there has been progress, he adds, such as through a legal maneuver that allowed Switzerland to reclaim Abacha assets by classifying his family as a criminal organization, thus lowering the burden of proof required for seizure.

New initiatives such as the US Kleptocracy Asset Recovery Initiative, and European Union-led efforts to establish transparency in offshore holdings, also aid recovery efforts.

But asset recovery experts also say that the attitude of the new US administration will be critical for further progress on the issue, and the Nigerians await their answer from the White House with no little anxiety.Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Story highlights Biologist who discovered species calls the name an honor

The moth's name also brings awareness to conservation challenges

(CNN) No doubt Donald Trump will be showered with honors at his inauguration, but none will be quite as unique as this little moth.

A biologist has named a newly discovered species of moth after our next president. The Neopalpa donaldtrumpi is a wee little creature found in parts of California and Baja, Mexico.

It seems nature favors fancy golden hairdos as much as the man himself (who could forget China's beloved Trump bird?), because the N. donaldtrumpi sports a very familiar-looking crown of yellowish scales. In the picture above, the little thing even looks like it's gesturing charismatically. A high-energy moth! All it needs is a tiny red hat.

When he came across the species, evolutionary biologist Dr. Vazrick Nazari knew what he had to do.

"With its hair tufts, its presence in US and Mexico, and its fragile habitat that needs conservation, I really did not have any choice with this one other than to name [the moth] after Mr. President-elect himself," Nazari said.

Read MoreJohn MacIntosh was a partner at a leading global private equity firm, where he worked from 1994 to 2006 in New York, Tokyo and London. He now runs a nonprofit in New York. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

I apologize for appealing to you directly, but you're the co-inventor of Twitter and the country needs your help. I'm sure you're already busy enough what with being the CEO of both Twitter and Square and all. And I recognize that you've very recently taken some positive steps to combat hateful and abusive content.

But like it or not, you must take on a new, more important job: reducing the existential threat posed by the new Twitter-armed President.

It's bad enough that your invention influenced the election and is now suppressing discussion and debate by allowing the administration to bypass a press which, as Steve Bannon recognizes, is the only real opposition. But far worse is that in the hands of the new President, Twitter has mutated from a 140-character toy of mass distraction into a potentially lethal weapon of mass destruction that poses a clear and present danger to us all.

As I see it, there are many tolerable, though disappointing, reasons why our imperfect civilization might meet an untimely end; some, like an asteroid or pandemic, are largely beyond our control while others like climate catastrophe, or a nanotechnology/bioengineering/high-energy physics mishap, are self-inflicted. But annihilation by tweet is not one of them.

In fact, it would be an absurd way to go. If the "shot heard round the world" signaled the start of the Revolutionary War; a "tweet heard round the world" could start something far bloodier. And even Trump's supporters must privately acknowledge that a Trump-launched "nuclear tweet" is a very real possibility.

But to be clear, it's not because Trump is rash that he shouldn't have access to the full, unbridled power of Twitter free from any checks and balances. Nobody with his type of power should.

Who among us has the self-control to avoid sending the occasional tweet we regret? Who might not wreak havoc if we had legions of zealous followers, a handful of nervous (and nuclear) foreign powers, and hundreds of loyal apparatchiks all hanging on our every tweet?

So what can you do? The easiest thing would be to simply deactivate his accounts for repeatedly breaking your rules. Rules which clearly state that tweets cannot be used to encourage illegal activities, make or promote threats of violence, harass others or give out private information.

And since Twitter is a not a public utility, nothing prevents you from pulling the presidential plug. There is no "Freedom of Tweet" in the First Amendment. There is no "Right to Send Tweets" in the Second.

But disconnecting the President would expose you to unbearable personal and political animus from the administration, as well as from an irate public that would no longer able to hear the facts -- alternative or otherwise -- directly from the commander-in-Tweet.

And they should be allowed to hear from him directly other than in those (hopefully) rare situations where a would-be Tweet might cause a war, incite a riot, encourage law breaking, or otherwise create pandemonium. (Cutting the cord would also be bad for business and, as a publicly-traded company, Twitter must carefully balance the financial interests of its shareholders against humanity's more general interest in survival.)

So let me suggest an alternative: the Bipartisan Commission on Presidential Tweets.

Here's how it might work:

1. Twitter inserts a delay into all Trump's tweets just like broadcasters do for live television. During the delay, a panel of three commissioners -- one Democrat, one Republican and one independent, determine whether or not it would be safe to release the tweet. (To staff this on a 24/7 basis would require at least 12 people working four shifts of three.)

2. Any commissioner could block any tweet or request additional proof that it is actually the President tweeting and not some hacker, terrorist or prankster who has hijacked his accounts.

3. If a Tweet were blocked, Trump would get an explanation of why ("The Tweet is illegal/could be interpreted as a declaration of war/ directly violates the Constitution, etc.")

4. Trump could resubmit a blocked-Tweet after a five-minute "cooling off" period during which his strongest feelings will generally have passed . But if he still wants to "Nuke the #$@%*!" or "Round up all the #$@%*!" he can submit the tweet for reconsideration.

5. A resubmitted tweet could only be blocked with the unanimous agreement of all three commissioners.

6. The identity of the commissioners on any given shift would be kept secret. There would be no record of the voting.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

7. The commission would be immunized from the political process by being an independent 501c3 funded equally by concerned citizens on the left (George Soros?) and the right (The Kochs?).

Will this work? Who knows. But you can't sit idly by while every morning and night, alone in the White House, watching TV with your invention in his hand, the President is just one ill-advised tweet away from sending us into the abyss. (Things could be worse; at least he's a teetotaler).

In the face of this existential threat, Trump's supporters and opponents must come together no matter how vehemently we disagree while living. You created the genie; now help put it back in the bottle.Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Frida Ghitis is a world affairs columnist for The Miami Herald and World Politics Review, and a former CNN producer and correspondent. The views expressed in this commentary are her own.

(CNN) If you watched President Trump's astonishing press conference on Thursday, you might be forgiven for concluding that the most urgent problem facing America is that the media "is out of control." Some media "is fantastic," the president allowed. But on the whole, journalism is plagued by "false, horrible, fake reporting."

It's clear that America's new President has chosen his new best enemy. Now that the campaign is over and it's not very useful to drive the crowds into a frenzy of hatred against Hillary Clinton, Trump has found the new direction in which to focus his supporters' animosity. But this time, the anointed enemy serves an even more useful purpose.

On Friday, he made his point even more directly, tweeting "The FAKE NEWS media (failing @nytimes, @CNN, @NBCNews and many more) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the American people. SICK!"

(He later deleted the "SICK!" part -- while adding @ABC and @CBS.)

The FAKE NEWS media (failing @nytimes , @NBCNews , @ABC , @CBS , @CNN ) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the American People!

The advantages of having an enemy are well-known. In Orwell's dystopian novel "1984" -- suddenly a new best-seller in the Trump era -- the masses engage in a daily mandatory ritual, the "Two Minutes of Hate," during which their anger is feverishly stoked against the foe of the moment. Dictators, strongmen and autocrats have practiced the art of drumming up loathing toward others to great effect.

Trump is no dictator, but he does have strong authoritarian tendencies and, like other demagogues, he knows that perceived enemies can help him fire up the base, rally the crowds and shift responsibility. Don't look at me, this script cries out; look over there, there is a threat, a danger, a foe.

When it comes to enemies, a demonized media is even more useful than the average antagonist.

Trump's real nemesis is the truth. By attacking the media, he opens up a new line of attack against facts, his true target. He is, after all, the Gaslighter in Chief . He is trying to confuse the public so that they will not believe inconvenient truths.

JUST WATCHED Congress reacts to Trump's news conference Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Congress reacts to Trump's news conference 02:28

What he wants is to manufacture his own pseudo-truth; to create a reality where he always wins. Where the only polls that count are the ones where he's doing great. Where the only comments about him are compliments, and where anything negative is false, the work of an out-of-control media.

Where when things go wrong it is someone else's fault: He practically blamed the media for Russia's positioning of a spy ship off the US coast, buzzing US ships and illegally launching a cruise missile. It happened, he said, because the media's false reporting made the Kremlin think there's no chance of improved relations.

His administration is in chaos, but it's all the media's fault. And besides, there is no chaos. But if there were...

During Thursday's press conference, Trump unleashed torrents of lies, distortions and fabrications. When he said he won by the biggest Electoral College victory since Ronald Reagan, it took a reporter to point out that the last three presidents, Obama, Bush and Clinton, won by larger margins. He dismissed it all with a flippant, "Well, I don't know, I was given that information."

As the scandal surrounding his campaign's ties to Russia grows, Trump wants the public to think it's all the doing of the dishonest media. But journalists are not letting up, and the vast majority of Americans are not going to fall for Trump's tactics for very long. Even on the generally-supportive Fox News channel, the brave Shepard Smith called him out . "It's absolutely crazy," Smith said. "He keeps repeating ridiculous throwaway lines that are not true at all and sort of avoiding this issue of Russia as if we're some kind of fools for asking the question."

The President thinks this scheme will work because journalists are unpopular, but he is wrong because he's reading the polls about journalists incorrectly.

On Thursday, he shot, "you have a lower approval rate than Congress." That's not true

But that's not the whole story. That poll was taken in September, during the height of the presidential campaign, amid a proliferation of false stories by phony news websites.

When Trump says the people don't trust the media, he doesn't know that the media outlets the people don't trust are the ones he likes -- and like him in return; probably the ones he described as "fantastic."

recent study by Morning Consult found that the majority of the people find the major media outlets are credible. At the top, ABC News was found credible by 67%, CBS by 65%, Tthe New York Times by 63% and CNN by 60% of the public.

The averages are brought down by the likes of Breitbart, the former professional home of Trump's top adviser, Steve Bannon. Only 19% believe what they report, just ahead of the satirical site The Onion, which doesn't even claim to tell the truth, but which nevertheless was found more credible than Infowars, the wild conspiracy peddling operation of Alex Jones.

Trump, incidentally, appeared on Alex Jones' radio show on December 2, 2015, the day of the San Bernardino terrorist attack. That day, on the air, Jones told him that 90% of his listeners are Trump supporters. And Trump reciprocated, telling the man who tells stories that would drive a real journalist to insanity, that "Your reputation is amazing. I will not let you down."

As for true journalism, Trump's attacks are missing the mark. Perhaps the 17% of Americans who believe news from Infowars also accept Trump's claims that his chaos-engulfed administration is running "like a fine-tuned machine." But his claims that the "failing New York Times" is struggling are as false as an Infowars headline (Just now: "Obama Planning Civil War.")

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

Trump wants America to think that it is the media that is out of control, because he wants to control what people view as true and false. It seemed like a good plan, but it has a fatal flaw. People are learning the difference between good journalism and bad. Trump's tactic may work for dictatorships. It won't work in the United States.Story highlights Amy Bass: Those who object to mixing of politics and sports overlook fact that the two have always been intertwined

New England Patriots players aren't the only athletes objecting to the Trump agenda, she writes

Amy Bass is a professor of history at the College of New Rochelle and has written widely on the cultural history of sports, including the book "Not the Triumph but the Struggle: The 1968 Olympics and the Making of the Black Athlete." Follow her on Twitter @bassab1. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

(CNN) It was tough to separate the snow from the confetti in Boston on Tuesday, but the New England faithful didn't care -- they cheered as the wind swirled, chanting "BRADY!" and "TB12!" at the sight of the Vince Lombardi trophy bestowed on their Super Bowl-winning Patriots.

Since 1886, when New Yorkers impulsively threw ticker tape out windows along Broadway at a parade honoring the dedication of the Statue of Liberty, cities have welcomed home dignitaries, astronauts and championship teams with parades like the one this week in Boston. The parades celebrate sports, but more than that, they express pride of city, region, and country.

Amy Bass

A visit to the White House by the champions is usually the next step, one taken by iconic athletes and teams before them.

Now, however, at least three members of the Patriots have said they won't go to the White House to meet President Donald Trump. Defensive back Devin McCourty and tight end Martellus Bennett, both of whom were supportive of Colin Kaepernick's national anthem protest throughout the regular season, declared they would not accompany their teammates for the ritual photo-op with the president.

McCourty told Time he didn't "feel accepted in the White House." They were followed by Pro Bowl linebacker Dont'a Hightower , who visited the White House when his University of Alabama team won a national championship but says he will decline this time.Adam Cathcart is a lecturer in Chinese history at the University of Leeds (United Kingdom) and the editor of Sino-NK.com. The views in this article are those of the author.

(CNN) Since becoming President, Donald Trump has, at times, looked like a wrecking ball to the international order.

But when it comes to North Korea, he may be forced to operate within the narrow constraints of his predecessors.

President Obama famously decided that the best way of dealing with the autocracy was with a policy of "strategic patience." In practice, this meant strengthening sanctions and waiting for North Korea to decide itself that halting its nuclear program would be prudent.

Some members of the President's Republican Party have previously argued for a more forceful response to North Korean aggression.

Trump's Twitter activity, prior to his inauguration, suggested that he was in agreement with this line of thinking.

North Korea just stated that it is in the final stages of developing a nuclear weapon capable of reaching parts of the U.S. It won't happen!  Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 2, 2017

But while taking such steps would be vigorous and decisive, it could possibly lead to a wider war.

Seoul, the South Korean capital, is within striking range of North Korean artillery, and Kim Jong Un has not been shy about his readiness to lash out.

Such escalations might include the shelling of South Korean-held islands off of his coastline, the insertion of landmines into the Demilitarized Zone, attacks on the South Korean navy, or even commando attacks on the Blue House (the home of South Korea's president) in Seoul.

Escalation can happen very quickly on the peninsula -- as was the case in the summer of 1950 , when a series of border clashes on the 38th parallel turned into an all-out invasion of South Korea.

This context is important to remember when trying to understand the limits facing Trump in constraining North Korea, a country that has managed to grab headlines recently with another missile launch.

When he was in Seoul earlier this month, US Defense Secretary James Mattis sought to deter North Korea by threatening the country with "a response that will be effective and overwhelming" in the event of an attack on the US or its allies.

But this most recent North Korean test was neither nuclear nor an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of striking the United States.

This incremental advance in North Korea's weapons program, therefore, wasn't "the big one" in terms of steps the country could take to provoke the US.

Nor has the country resumed its nuclear tests since Trump arrived in office -- having carried out four such tests during the Obama years, undeterred by UN resolutions forbidding such actions.

Trump has made a great deal of noise since arriving in office but, paradoxically, his failure to focus on a North Korea policy has created a small space for progress on what the Obama administration considered to be the greatest threat to US security.

The Obama administration had pushed very hard for the inclusion of human rights and even International Criminal Court prosecution as a pressure point against North Korea, much to the anger of the regime.

The lack of criticism of North Korea's many documented human rights violations from the State Department and new Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is surely music to Pyongyang's ears.

North Korean state media is at present keeping its powder dry: it has not yet attacked Donald Trump by name or criticized him for anything.

JUST WATCHED North Korea improves missile program Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH North Korea improves missile program 02:16

Even Mattis' visiting Seoul and the meetings between National Security Adviser Michael Flynn with his South Korean counterpart were not lambasted.

For all its reputation of being a crazed and irrational state, North Korea appears to be taking a rational approach to Trump and waiting to see what happens in Washington.

So could Trump, so keen on deal-making, use this small leverage to talk some sense into Kim Jong Un? Unlikely. If North Korean state media is to be believed, Kim's subjects are hungering for a showdown with the US -- and are fiercely proud of their emerging nuclear deterrent and missile capabilities.

It is doubtful that Trump will be able to change this. Short of sending Tillerson or traveling to North Korea himself, it seems unlikely that he will make a significant breakthrough.

The only realistic approach for the White House, it seems, would be to closely monitor the rhetorical chest-thumping -- along with the huge military exercises on both sides of the DMZ -- and hope that a small conflagration does not escalate into something more dire. In other words, with North Korea taking a seemingly more cautious approach with the new administration, "strategic patience" may bring Trump more success than it did Obama.Sal Moceri gets visibly agitated at the very mention of the word "NAFTA." He thinks the trade deal killed the American Dream.

"NAFTA was one of the worst contracts ever negotiated for the American worker," the 61-year-old Ford worker told CNNMoney.

Moceri has one of the coveted jobs that President Trump wants more of in America. He earns about $30 an hour fixing tools at a Ford (F) plant in Detroit. The job has allowed him to send four kids to college.

He calls himself a "lifelong Democrat." That is, until 2016, when he voted for Donald Trump, largely because of Trump's vow to redo NAFTA.

Michigan has lost nearly 300,000 manufacturing jobs since 2000. Moceri kept his job, but he says he has a lot of friends who didn't.

Many economists say there's no way those jobs will come back. The problem, they argue, is that machines took over. One study by Ball State University says 87% of American manufacturing jobs have been lost to robots. Only 13% have disappeared because of trade.

But workers in Michigan think the experts have it wrong. They don't blame robots at all. In fact, they love the machines.

"Automation is great. I want it to excel. I want more computers. I want more robots," says Moceri.

Frank Pitcher, a fellow Ford worker and UAW union member, agrees. He strongly believes robots have saved workers' backs and caused Ford employees to become a lot more skilled.

Robots have "replaced a lot of jobs that actually injured people," says Pitcher, who is about to turn 50 and glad his body isn't busted up. "I don't fear the technology or the automation. I welcome it."

CNNMoney spent a week in the Detroit metro region talking to current and former manufacturing workers. Almost all said the same thing: It's not the robots that took U.S. jobs, it's NAFTA.

Related: Trump gives America's 'poorest white town' hope

'I've had to let most of my workers go'

A giant American flag hangs on the wall of Matt Seely's small manufacturing shop in Detroit. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, his company, Quality Bending and Threading, was buzzing. He employed 17 workers. The phone rang all the time with orders from the big auto companies and defense contractors for specialty steel parts.

Today he employs just five people. He blames NAFTA for the decline.

"There was a point in time before NAFTA came in where there was a machine shop like this literally on every corner in the metro Detroit area," Seely says. Now he thinks people don't want to pay for American-made when they can get it cheaper from Mexico.

NAFTA was the trade deal President Bill Clinton signed with Mexico and Canada that went into effect in January 1994. It allows many goods to be imported into the U.S. from those countries without being taxed.

"We're not trading equally, and that's the real issue," says Seely. He believes it's not fair the U.S. ran a $63 billion trade deficit with Mexico last year, meaning the U.S. bought more from Mexico than it sold to Mexico.

Seely says he was never much of a political guy, until Trump camp along. He and his wife volunteered for Trump and ended up running a campaign office. Trump's son Eric toured Seely's factory.

Trump has clearly tapped into this anti-NAFTA fervor. He campaigned hard in Michigan, holding four rallies there in the final week before the election. He vowed that "Detroit -- the Motor City -- will come roaring back." He ended up winning Michigan by 10,704 votes.

Related: Mexico ready to retaliate by hurting American corn farmers

Trump calls NAFTA a 'catastrophe'

Since taking office, Trump has called NAFTA a "catastrophe" and promised to start renegotiating it this spring. It's exactly what Ken Sultes, another Ford worker and union member, wants to hear.

It's been "a downward spiral as far as jobs leaving this country," laments Sultes, who loves cars and wore a BMW ball cap to his interview. He also thinks the experts have it wrong about what's been hurting his industry.

"It's not like a robot comes to a line and 500 people lose their job," he explains. Sultes says only a few jobs are replaced by machines at a time. Typically, the displaced workers stay in the factory and move to another job.

In contrast, manufacturing workers are well aware of when there's a big factory closing. When that happens, hundreds of jobs go to another state -- or overseas.

While Trump and many workers blame NAFTA for the Rust Belt's woes, the data shows a far more murky story. Michigan actually gained manufacturing jobs after NAFTA was signed in 1994. The real downturn didn't begin until 2000, around the time China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.

The Great Recession caused more losses, although Michigan has actually rebounded from the worst of the crisis. Over 150,000 manufacturing jobs have come back since the low of 2009. It's helped that U.S. car sales have been at record levels lately.

Related: I raised 3 kids on minimum wage. Here's what Trump should know

Michigan: Some jobs are back, but at what pay?

While there's a lot of worry in Michigan, the state's unemployment rate just hit 5%, the lowest level since 2001. That implies there are jobs in Michigan again.

But workers likes Sultes and Pitcher argue the jobs around now aren't middle-class jobs, especially for workers just getting started. Even at the auto plants, the big companies like Ford have created a "two-tier system" where they pay some employees about $30 an hour and others a far lower wage of about $20.

Many workers blame NAFTA -- especially cheap Mexican labor -- for pulling down U.S. wages.

"We never had a two-tiered employment where I worked before the NAFTA program," says Moceri, shaking his head. The company basically said, "If you don't accept this lower wage, this job will be gone."

-- CNNMoney's Logan Whiteside and Richa Naik contributed to this story.Story highlights "Everybody's aware of the problem in New Hampshire," Miller said.

But neither Trump nor the losing GOP senator asked for a recount

Washington (CNN) President Donald Trump's senior policy adviser on Sunday repeated Trump's unsubstantiated claims that people were bused from Massachusetts to New Hampshire to vote illegally in the swing state during the 2016 election.

But he provided no evidence to support that claim or other claims of widespread voter fraud.

In a contentious interview with ABC's George Stephanopoulos on "This Week," White House policy director Stephen Miller repeated Trump's claim last week that he would have won New Hampshire were it not for "thousands" of people being bused there.

"Go to New Hampshire. Talk to anybody who's worked in politics there for a long time. Everybody's aware of the problem in New Hampshire," Miller said.

JUST WATCHED McConnell disagrees with Trump fraud claim Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH McConnell disagrees with Trump fraud claim 01:20

Stephanopoulos pressed Miller for evidence to support Trump's claim, but when none was given, said: "Just for the record, you have provided absolutely no evidence."

Read MoreDean Obeidallah, a former attorney, is the host of SiriusXM radio's daily program "The Dean Obeidallah Show" and a columnist for The Daily Beast. Follow him @deanofcomedy . The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) On Saturday morning, President Donald Trump may have unleashed his most bone-chilling tweet -- at least to those who believe the United States should not become a Trump-led dictatorship. And I don't make that comment simply to be provocative or without giving it a great deal of thought. Our democracy is far more fragile than some might grasp and Trump is engaging in a concerted effort to undermine the workings of it.

Here is Trump's truly jaw-dropping tweet from Saturday morning: "The opinion of this so-called judge, which essentially takes law-enforcement away from our country, is ridiculous and will be overturned!"

Why is this so concerning? It's OK to argue about whether the judge should or shouldn't have issued this order. But Trump is apparently attempting to delegitimize our federal judiciary by calling Judge James Robart, a George W. Bush-appointed judge, a "so-called" judge while arguing that his decision is "ridiculous."

Let's be blunt, because the stakes demand it: An independent federal judiciary is our last, best hope at preventing Trump from violating the US Constitution and illegally grabbing power. And Trump has to understand that, hence his attempt to undermine it.

The President truly appears to be leading a master class in transforming the United States into a dictatorship. Trump -- and it's fair to assume it is by design -- has sought to undermine anyone or anything that tries to counter him.

First, Trump has made the media -- which is a watchdog of our presidents -- a focus of his attacks, calling them "dishonest," claiming they peddle "fake news" and even recently labeling them "the opposition party." The practical result is that when the media calls out Trump's lies and presents objective facts to counter him, his followers will likely dismiss the media reports and instead side with Trump.

Then Trump went after our intelligence agencies because he didn't agree with their views on Russia's involvement in our recent election. Trump lashed out, calling these agencies, charged with gathering information for our national security, "disgraceful" and accusing them of leaking information, comparing it to "something that Nazi Germany would have done."

Trump has clearly begun the process of destroying their credibility so if they come forward in the future to oppose his views or offer facts to undermine his position, he will tell his followers they also aren't to be believed.

And now Trump, who attacked a judge during his campaign, citing his Mexican heritage, has turned on our judiciary again. But this time it's far more disturbing given Trump is not a candidate, but president of the United States. The rationale must be assumed to be the same, namely that Trump wants to delegitimize the judiciary so that court decisions Trump disagrees with will be viewed by his followers as at the least horribly partisan, or at worst invalid.

It's frightening to think where this could lead. For example, when the United States Supreme Court ruled in the historic case of Brown v. Board of Education that racial segregation in our public schools was unconstitutional, it took then-President Dwight Eisenhower to implement that decision

Arkansas Gov. Orval Faubus had refused to follow the Court's decision and instead surrounded an all-white high school in his state with National Guard troops to prevent its integration. Eisenhower responded by federalizing the Arkansas National Guard to enforce the Supreme Court's seminal decision and allow black students to attend the school.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

Would Trump do the same if he had passionately disagreed with the Court's decision or would he simply ignore it while attacking the legitimacy of our judiciary, sparking a constitutional crisis? And would certain Trump-supporting federal agency heads, or even federal officers, refuse to follow court orders (or at least do it very slowly) because Trump has convinced them the federal judiciary's decisions cannot be trusted?

There's no doubt Trump supporters are very loyal to him personally. Keep in mind that Trump infamously bragged that he could even shoot a person on Fifth Avenue in New York and his supporters would still be on his side. And according to a CNN/ORC poll , while Trump has only a 44% approval rating overall, 90% of Republicans think he's doing a good job.

The Founding Fathers enshrined a separation of powers in our Constitution so that there would be inherent checks and balances to avoid a situation where a president could become a king. After all, the Founders had just risked life and limb rebelling against the King of England.

Trump's concerted attacks to delegitimize our media, our intelligence community and now our federal judiciary would have no doubt alarmed them. And it should be terrifying to every American who truly believes in our Constitution and in the promise of America.Melbourne, Florida (CNN) President Donald Trump, after a month of arduous and, at times, turbulent governing, got what he came for Saturday during a dusk rally here: Campaign-level adulation.

Trump, who just months ago finished campaigning for the office he now holds, was both selling what his administration has done in its first 30 days and trying to change the subject after a chaotic month. The President was forced to fire his national security adviser, struggled to roll out his travel ban and strained to explain a growing story about how members of his 2016 campaign made repeated contact with Russian individuals known to US intelligence.

Trump, clearly ready for some relief from the confines of Washington and the limitations of the house he ran to occupy, reverted back to his campaign habits, basking in what energized him for months during the slog of his race against Hillary Clinton.

At one point, Trump invited Gene Huber, a supporter up to the stage, who was briefly stopped by the Secret Service before the President urged agents to let him come up and address the audience.

"I wouldn't say Secret Service was thrilled with that ... but we know our people," Trump said.

"I am here because I want to be among my friends and among the people," Trump said to open his rally. "This was a great movement, a movement like has never been seen before in our country or before anywhere else, this was a truly great movement and I want to be here with you and I will always be with you."

Trump, as he did often during the campaign, turned his fire on the media during the packed event -- estimated to number 9,000, according to Melbourne police -- slammed international trade deals made by his predecessors and pledged to bring back the jobs to the United States.

The President said his administration would release a new immigration order "over the next couple of days" that aimed to curb the flow of refugees.

Slamming the judges who decided the order was unconstitutional, Trump even read the US code that he believes gives him the authority to implement the executive order.

"If you have a college education you can understand it. If you have a high school education, you can understand it. If you were a bad student in high school, you can understand it," he said.

But Saturday's rally was different: Trump pulled up in Air Force One, not his private plane, stepping off the plane with first lady Melania Trump as his crowd roared and the speakers blared the theme song from the 1997 Harrison Ford movie "Air Force One."

"When the media lies to the people, I will never let them get away with it. I will do whatever I can so they don't get away with it. They have their own agenda and their agenda is not your agenda," Trump said Saturday.

As he bellowed, event attendees turned to the pen where the media stood and booed.

Trump previewed these attacks in the days leading up to his event, tweeting Friday that a list of outlets were "the enemy of the American People!"

Trump also looked to rebut reports of a chaotic White House, telling supporters, "the White House is running so smoothly, so smoothly."

What was unclear Saturday was what exactly Trump was campaigning for. The event was being run by Trump's 2016 campaign, Donald J. Trump for President Inc.

Before taking the stage, Trump was asked if it was too early to do another campaign event. His response: "Life is a campaign."

"Making our country great again is a campaign," Trump added. "For me, it's a campaign. To make America great again is absolutely a campaign."

On Friday, White House spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Trump was headlining the event as a way to go around the media.

"People in this circle don't always do the best job delivering his message (because) nobody does it better than he does," Sanders said about the media.

"So he can do that very easily by taking the stage and talking directly to the people of America, addressing their concerns and being able to properly express exactly what he's doing and what his administration has done over the last month," Sanders said on Air Force One as the plane headed south to Florida.

Trump's presidential campaign was defined by raucous events where he would deliver hour-long stemwinders, responding directly to the chants of the crowd and seemingly plugging into the energy that his supporters were throwing his way.

Former campaign aides said before the that they were not surprised Trump was getting back on the road so early in his first term, in part because it was what fueled him for months on the campaign trail.

Michael Caputo, a former senior adviser to Trump's campaign, said he expects this sort of campaign-style event will be the "first of many."

"He grew very familiar with the rally concept and I expect him to return to where he is comfortable when he needs to recharge," Caputo said. "The fact that Trump showed us a new way of winning should have given everyone a hint that he would show everyone a new way of governing."Story highlights Trump had previously buoyed Russia's claim to Crimea

Kremlin insists 'Crimea is part of the Russian Federation'

(CNN) US President Donald Trump has taken a swipe at the previous Obama administration, suggesting it was "too soft" on Russia over its annexation of Crimea.

Under increasing pressure over his administration's relationship with Russia , President Trump commented on Twitter Wednesday that the Crimea peninsula was "taken" by Russia from Ukraine under the Obama administration.

Crimea was TAKEN by Russia during the Obama Administration. Was Obama too soft on Russia?  Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 15, 2017

The comments mark a sharp U-turn for Trump, who had previously buoyed the Kremlin's claim on Crimea.

Russia annexed Crimea, a territory in the former Soviet republic of Ukraine, in March 2014 following tensions with its neighbor.

The White House and the Kremlin have engaged in back-and-forth commentry over Crimea in recent days. Trump's Press Secretary Sean Spicer said Tuesday: "President Trump has made it very clear that he expects the Russian government to deescalate violence in the Ukraine and return Crimea."Peter Bergen is CNN's national security analyst, a vice president at New America and a professor of practice at Arizona State University. He is the author of " United States of Jihad: Investigating America's Homegrown Terrorists ."

(CNN) First, there was the " Bowling Green massacre " that wasn't.

Now comes President Donald Trump's claim Monday at the key US military base overseeing the war on ISIS -- US Central Command in Tampa, Florida -- that the media aren't reporting terrorism for "reasons" the President didn't elaborate upon.

Trump told the CENTCOM audience, "You've seen what happened in Paris and Nice. All over Europe, it's happening. It's gotten to a point where it's not even being reported. And in many cases, the very, very dishonest press doesn't want to report it. They have their reasons, and you understand that."

To "prove" that the media aren't covering terrorism adequately the Trump White House, which is fighting in court to reinstate a refugee ban citing the terrorist threat, on Monday night released a list of 78 "major" terrorist attacks since September 2014, claiming, "Most have not received the media attention they deserved."

This is one of the biggest baloney sandwiches this White House has foisted on the public since ... well ... the "Bowling Green massacre," but it's a much bigger and harder-to swallow helping of baloney because it is the President who is forcing it down our throats rather than one of his aides.

Taking the White House timeline of terrorist attacks, I ran it through the Nexis database, which is an authoritative resource for tracking media hits of all types, including in newspapers, magazines, wire service reports, TV news shows and the like.

The results show that terrorist attacks over the past couple of years are, in fact, some of the most well-reported stories of our times. The total number of media hits for the 78 terrorist attacks that the White House released Monday is 80,878, or about an average of slightly more than 1,000 mentions per incident.

And those numbers clearly understate how much coverage the media have given these incidents because a Nexis search only will display a maximum of 3,000 mentions for any given search.

There are 16 terrorist attacks on the White House list of purportedly under-covered attacks that each elicited more than 3,000 media mentions.

The following are a representative sample:

 In Ottawa in October 2014 Michael Zehaf-Bibeau killed a Canadian soldier.

 Two months later in Sydney, Man Haron Monis killed two Australians.

 In March 2015, 21 tourists were killed at the Bardo Museum in Tunis, Tunisia.

 Two months later in Garland, Texas, two ISIS-inspired militants attacked a Prophet Mohammed cartoon contest. Luckily no one was killed except the terrorists.

 In Tunisia, also in 2015, 38 were killed at a beach popular with Westerners.

 In October 2015, 224 were killed in Sinai, Egypt, when ISIS brought down a Russian passenger jet with a bomb.

The terror attacks in Paris and Nice, France, that Trump cited in his CENTCOM speech also received more than 3,000 media mentions.

The terrorist attacks that didn't get as much coverage were -- surprise --- the ones where there were no deaths or that took place in countries such as Saudi Arabia or Bangladesh where there is little independent media reporting.

In three cases, there were no articles listed in the publications included in the Nexis database, and in each of those cases there were no casualties.

The media, including CNN, have exhaustively covered terrorism around the globe since the 9/11 attacks made the issue a central national security concern.

Indeed, the wall-to-wall media coverage of the ISIS attacks in Paris in November 2015 in which 129 were killed and the ISIS-inspired attack in San Bernardino, California, a month later in which 14 were killed was instrumental in boosting Trump in the polls, according to the polling analysis site FiveThirtyEight

Many Americans felt threatened by the ISIS-directed and ISIS-inspired attacks. As the presidential campaign was in full swing at the beginning of 2016, just over half of Americans said they were very or somewhat worried that they, or a member of their family, would be victims of a terrorist attack. This was the largest number to feel that way since just after the 9/11 attacks.

And how did so many Americans learn about the terrorist attacks they were so scared of? Here's a clue: It wasn't through telepathy.

Below is the official White House timeline of terrorist attacks since September 2014 with my annotations in bold about the media coverage they each received. (There are a number of incorrectly spelled words I have left as they were in the original.)

TIMELINE: September, 2014 - December, 2016

NUMBER OF ATTACKS: 78

MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA

September, 2014

TARGET: Two police officers wounded in knife attack

ATTACKER: Abdul Numan Haider

406 stories

TIZI OUZOU, ALGERIA

September, 2014

TARGET: One French citizen beheaded

ATTACKER: Jund al-Khilafah in Algeria

140 stories

QUEBEC, CANADA

October, 2014

TARGET: One soldier killed and one wounded in vehicle attack

ATTACKER: Martin Couture-Rouleau

1,509 stories

OTTAWA, CANADA

October, 2014

TARGET: One soldier killed at war memorial; two wounded in shootings at Parliament building

ATTACKER: Michael Zehaf-Bibeau

More than 3,000 stories

NEW YORK CITY, NY, USA

October, 2014

TARGET: Two police officers wounded in knife attack

ATTACKER: US person

477 stories

RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA

November, 2014

TARGET: One Danish citizen wounded in shooting

ATTACKERS: Three Saudi Arabia-based ISIL members

10 stories

ABU DHABI, UAE

DATE: December 2014

TARGET: One American killed in knife attack

ATTACKER: Dalal al-Hashimi

24 stories

SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA

December, 2014

TARGET: Two Australians killed in hostage taking and shooting

ATTACKER: Man Haron Monis

More than 3,000 stories

TOURS, FRANCE

December, 2014

TARGET: Three police officers wounded in knife attack

ATTACKER: Bertrand Nzohabonayo

91 stories

PARIS, FRANCE

January, 2015

TARGET: One police officer and four hostages killed in shooting at a kosher supermarket

ATTACKER: Amedy Coulibaly

More than 3,000 stories

TRIPOLI, LIBYA

January, 2015

TARGET: Ten killed, including one US citizen, and five wounded in bombing and shooting at a hotel frequented by westerners

ATTACKERS: As many as five ISIL-Libya members

837 stories

RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA

January, 2015

TARGET: Two US citizens wounded in shooting

ATTACKER: Saudi Arabia-based ISIL supporter

5 stories

NICE, FRANCE

February, 2015

TARGET: Two French soldiers wounded in knife attack outside a Jewish community center

ATTACKER: Moussa Coulibaly

268 stories

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

February, 2015

TARGET: One civilian killed in shooting at a free-speech rally and one security guard killed outside the city's main synagogue

ATTACKER: Omar Abdel Hamid el-Hussein

535 stories

TUNIS, TUNISIA

March, 2015

TARGET: 21 tourists killed, including 16 westerners, and 55 wounded in shooting at the Bardo Museum

ATTACKERS: Two ISIL-aligned extremists

More than 3,000 stories

KARACHI, PAKISTAN

April, 2015

TARGET: One US citizen wounded in knife attack

ATTACKERS: Pakistan-based ISIL supporters

375 stories

PARIS, FRANCE

April, 2015

TARGET: Catholic churches targeted; one civilian killed in shooting, possibly during an attempted carjacking

ATTACKER: Sid Ahmed Ghlam

612 stories

ZVORNIK, BOSNIA

April, 2015

TARGET: One police officer killed and two wounded in shooting

ATTACKER: Nerdin Ibric

61 stories

GARLAND, TX, USA

May, 2015

TARGET: One security guard wounded in shooting at the Prophet Muhammad cartoon event

ATTACKERS: Two US persons

More than 3,000 stories

BOSTON, MA, USA

June, 2015

TARGET: No casualties; one police officer attacked with knife

ATTACKER: US person

627 stories

EL GORA (AL JURAH), EGYPT

June, 2015

TARGET: No casualties; camp used by Multinational Force and Observers (MFO) troops attacked in shooting and bombing attack

ATTACKERS: Unknown number of ISIL-Sinai members

0 stories

LUXOR, EGYPT

June, 2015

TARGET: One police officer killed by suicide bomb near the Temple of Karnak

ATTACKER: Unidentified

101 Stories

SOUSSE, TUNISIA

June, 2015

TARGET: 38 killed and 39 wounded in shooting at a beach frequented by westerners

ATTACKERS: Seifeddine Rezgui and another unidentified attacker

More than 3,000 stories

LYON, FRANCE

June, 2015

TARGET: One civilian killed in beheading and explosion at a chemical plant

ATTACKER: Yasin Salhi

188 stories

CAIRO, EGYPT

July, 2015

TARGET: One killed and nine wounded in VBIED attack at Italian Consulate

ATTACKER: Unidentified ISIL operatives

1,085 stories

CAIRO, EGYPT

July, 2015

TARGET: One Croatian national kidnapped; beheaded on August 12 at an unknown location

ATTACKER: Unidentified ISIL-Sinai operative

466 stories

PARIS, FRANCE

August, 2015

TARGET: Two civilians and one US soldier wounded with firearms and knife on a passenger train

ATTACKER: Ayoub el-Khazzani

2,484 stories

EL GORA, EGYPT

September, 2015

TARGET: Four US and two MFO troops wounded in IED attack

ATTACKER: Unidentified

5 stories

DHAKA, BANGLADESH

September, 2015

TARGET: One Italian civilian killed in shooting

ATTACKER: Unidentified

788 stories

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

September, 2015

TARGET: One police officer wounded in knife attack

ATTAKER: Palestinian national

130 stories

EL GORA, EGYPT

October, 2015

TARGET: No casualties; airfield used by MFO attacked with rockets

ATTAKER: Unidentified ISIL-Sinai operatives

0 stories

PARRAMATTA, AUSTRALIA

October, 2015

TARGET: One police officer killed in shooting

ATTAKER: Farhad Jabar

1,826 stories

RANGPUR, BANGLADESH

October, 2015

TARGET: One Japanese civilian killed in shooting

ATTAKER: Unidentified

471 stories

HASANAH, EGYPT

October, 2015

TARGET: 224 killed in downing of a Russian airliner

ATTAKER: Unidentified ISIL-Sinai operatives

More than 3,000 stories

MERCED, CA, US

November, 2015

TARGET: Four wounded in knife attack on a college campus

ATTAKER: US person

163 stories

PARIS, FRANCE

November, 2015

TARGET: At least 129 killed and approximately 400 wounded in series of shootings and IED attacks

ATTAKERS: Brahim Abdelslam, Saleh Abdeslam, Ismail Mostefai, Bilal Hadfi, Samy Amimour, Chakib Ahrouh, Foued Mohamed Aggad, and Abdelhamid Abaaoud

More than 3.000 stories

DINAJPUR, BANGLADESH

November, 2015

TARGET: One Italian citizen wounded in shooting

ATTAKER: Unidentified

203 stories

RAJLOVAC, BOSNIA

December, 2015

TARGET: Two Bosnian soldiers killed in shooting

ATTAKER: Enes Omeragic

42 stories

SAN BERNADINO, CA

December, 2015

TARGET: 14 killed and 21 wounded in coordinated firearms attack

ATTAKERS: Two US persons

More than 3,000 stories

LONDON, ENGLAND, UK

December, 2015

TARGET: Three wounded in knife attack at an underground rail station

ATTAKER: Muhyadin Mire

44 stories

DERBENT, RUSSIA

December, 2015

TARGET: One killed and 11 wounded in shooting at UN World Heritage site

ATTAKER: Unidentified ISIL-Caucasus operative

286 stories

CAIRO, EGYPT

January, 2016

TARGET: Two wounded in drive-by shooting outside a hotel frequented by tourists

ATTAKERS: Unidentified ISIL operatives

5 stories

PARIS, FRANCE

January, 2016

TARGET: No casualties; attacker killed after attempted knife attack on Paris police station

ATTAKER: Tarek Belgacem

97 stories

PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA

January, 2016

TARGET: One police officer wounded in shooting

ATTAKER: US person

321 stories

HURGHADA, EGYPT

January, 2016

TARGET: One German and one Danish national wounded in knife attack at a tourist resort

ATTAKER: Unidentified

5 stories

MARSEILLES, FRANCE

January, 2016

TARGET: One Jewish teacher wounded in machete attack

ATTAKER: 15 year-old Ethnic Kurd from Turkey

184 stories

ISTANBUL, TURKEY

January, 2016

TARGET: 12 German tourists killed and 15 wounded in suicide bombing

ATTAKER: Nabil Fadli

More than 3,000 stories

JAKARTA, INDONESIA

January, 2016

TARGET: Four civilians killed and more than 20 wounded in coordinated bombing and firearms attacks near a police station and a Starbucks

ATTAKERS: Dian Joni Kurnaiadi, Muhammad Ali, Arif Sunakim, and Ahmad Muhazan bin Saron

2,530 stories

COLUMBUS, OH, US

February, 2016

TARGET: Four civilians wounded in machete attack at a restaurant

ATTAKER: US person

108 stories

HANOVER, GERMANY

February, 2016

TARGET: One police officer wounded in knife attack

ATTAKER: Safia Schmitter

60 stories

ISTANBUL, TURKEY

March, 2016

TARGET: Four killed and 36 wounded in suicide bombing in the tourist district

ATTAKER: Mehmet Ozturk

306 stories

BRUSSELS, BELGIUM

March, 2016

TARGET: At least 31 killed and 270 wounded in coordinated bombings at Zaventem Airport and on a subway train

ATTAKERS: Khalid el-Bakraoui, Ibrahim el-Bakraoui, Najim Laachraoui, Mohammed Abrini, and Osama Krayem

More than 3,000 stories

ESSEN, GERMANY

April, 2016

TARGET: Three wounded in bombing at Sikh temple

ATTAKERS: Three identified minors

197 stories

ORLANDO, FL, US

June, 2016

TARGET: 49 killed and 53 wounded in shooting at a nightclub

ATTAKER: US person

More than 3,000 stories

MAGNANVILLE, FRANCE

June, 2016

TARGET: One police officer and one civilian killed in knife attack

ATTAKER: Larossi Abballa

1,124 stories

KABUL, AFGHANISTAN

June, 2016

TARGET: 14 killed in suicide attack on a bus carrying Canadian Embassy guards

ATTAKER: ISIL-Khorasan operative

1,404 stories

ISTANBUL, TURKEY

June, 2016

TARGET: 45 killed and approximately 240 wounded at Ataturk International Airport

ATTACKERS: Rakhim Bulgarov, Vadim Osmanov, and an unidentified ISIL operative

More than 3,000 stories

DHAKA, BANGLADESH

July, 2016

TARGET: 22 killed, including one American and 50 wounded after hours-long siege using machetes and firearms at holy Artisan Bakery

ATTACKERS: Nibras Islam, Rohan Imtiaz, Meer Saameh Mubasheer, Khairul Islam Paye, and Shafiqul Islam Uzzal

More than 3,000 stories

NICE, FRANCE

July, 2016

TARGET: 84 civilians killed and 308 wounded by an individual who drove a truck into a crowd

ATTACKER: Mohamed Bouhlel

More than 3,000 stories

WURZBURG, GERMANY

July, 2016

TARGET: Four civilians wounded in axe attack on a train

ATTACKER: Riaz Khan Ahmadzai

283 stories

ANSBACH, GERMANY

July, 2016

TARGET: At least 15 wounded in suicide bombing at a music festival

ATTACKER: Mohammad Daleel

300 stories

NORMANDY, FRANCE

July, 2016

TARGET: One priest killed in knife attack

ATTACKERS: Adel Kermiche and Abdel Malik Nabil Petitjean

1,637 stories

CHALEROI, BELGIUM

August, 2016

TARGET: Two police officers wounded in machete attack

ATTACKER: Khaled Babouri

10 stories

QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA

August, 2016

TARGET: Two killed and one wounded in knife attack at a hostel frequented by Westerners

ATTACKER: Smail Ayad

852 stories

COPENHAGEN, DENMAKR

September, 2016

TARGET: Two police officers and a civilian wounded in shooting

ATTACKER: Mesa Hodzic

43 stories

PARIS, FRANCE

September, 2016

TARGET: One police officer wounded in raid after VBIED failed to detonate at Notre Dame Cathedral

ATTACKERS: Sarah Hervouet, Ines Madani, and Amel Sakaou

21 stories

SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA

September, 2016

TARGET: One civilian wounded in knife attack

ATTACKER: Ihsas Khan

269 stories

ST. CLOUD, MN, US

September, 2016

TARGET: 10 wounded in knife attack in a mall

ATTACKER: Dahir Ahmed Adan

241 stories

NEW YORK, NY; SEASIDE PARK AND ELIZABETH, NJ, US

September, 2016

TARGET: 31 wounded in bombing in New York City; several explosive devices found in New York and New Jersey; one exploded without casualty at race in New Jersey; one police officer wounded in shootout

ATTACKER: Ahmad Khan Rahami

More than 3,000 stories

BRUSSELS, BELGIUM

October, 2016

TARGET: Two police officers wounded in stabbing

ATTACKER: Belgian national

31 stories

KUWAIT CITY, KUWAIT

TARGET: No casualties; vehicle carrying three US soldiers hit by a truck

ATTACKER: Ibrahim Sulayman

0 stories

MALMO, SWEDEN

October, 2016

TARGET: No casualties; mosque and community center attacked with Molotov cocktail

ATTACKER: Syrian national

26 stories

HAMBURG, GERMANY

October, 2016

TARGET: One killed in knife attack

ATTACKER: Unknown

516 stories

MANILA, PHILIPPINES

November, 2016

TARGET: No casualties; failed IED attempt near US Embassy

ATTACKERS: Philippine nationals aligned with the Maute group

1 story

COLUMBUS, OH, US

November, 2016

TARGET: 14 wounded by individuals who drove a vehicle into a group of pedestrians and attacked them with a knife

ATTACKER: US person

More than 3,000 stories

N'DJAMENA, CHAD

November, 2016

TARGET: No casualties; attacker arrested after opening fire at entrance of US Embassy

ATTACKER: Chadian national

11 stories

KARAK, JORDAN

December, 2016

TARGET: 10 killed and 28 wounded in shooting at a tourist site

ATTACKERS: Several gunmen

2,037 stories

BERLIN, GERMANY

December, 2016

TARGET: 12 killed and 48 wounded by individual who drove truck into a crowded market

ATTACKER: Anis Amri

More than 3,000 storiesMichael D'Antonio is the author of the new book "Never Enough: Donald Trump and the Pursuit of Success" (St. Martin's Press) and is due to be a guest on "CNN Newsroom" Monday in the 10 a.m. hour. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) Given a straighforward opportunity to disavow the most dangerous brand of hatred in American history, the man who has declared, "I'm, like, a really smart person" couldn't do it.

"I don't know anything about what you're even talking about with white supremacy or white supremacists," said Donald Trump in a response to CNN's Jake Tapper. "So I don't know. I don't know -- did he endorse me, or what's going on? Because I know nothing about David Duke; I know nothing about white supremacists."

The statement was classic Trump: a chopped salad made out of words. But the two parts were clear. "I know nothing about David Duke," he said. "I know nothing about white supremacists." (Trump later tweeted a disavowal.)

Every literate American adult, and certainly anyone running for president, must know that Duke is the former leader of the Ku Klux Klan and that white supremacists promote a violently racist ideology that plagues America.

The 1995 bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma City that killed 168 people, including 21 kids in a daycare center, was associated with if not inspired by white supremacy.

Since 9/11 white supremacists and other domestic terrorists have carried out more deadly attacks on American soil than Muslim extremists. It was a white supremacist who killed nine people at a Bible study at a Charleston, South Carolina, church last summer.

Concern about racist support for Trump arose last week when David Duke said on Facebook that he liked Trump's stands on certain issues and the way the candidate exposed "lies" perpetrated by the press and believed he will ensure "that White-Americans are allowed to preserve and promote their heritage and interests just as all other groups are allowed to do."

When first informed of Duke's support on Friday, Trump didn't have any trouble recognizing the name. "David Duke endorsed me?" he said. "OK, all right. I disavow, OK?" This makes sense, given the fact that Duke is notorious for hate-mongering and Trump named him years ago when he explained why he dropped out of the old Reform Party. Back then, and again on Friday, he knew who Duke was and seemed to recognize that he's political poison.

Trump's tune changed 48 hours before polls would open for Super Tuesday primaries, many of them in Southern states. Suddenly he was unable to place Duke's name and he didn't know a thing about the movement that keeps white racist extremism alive in America.

This from a fellow who is famous for recalling every detail of every deal he ever made and who never forgets those who offend him. If Duke was so bad that his presence drove Trump out of the Reform Party, it's unlikely he's forgotten him.

What's going on here? As someone who has spent many hours with Trump and devoted two years to piecing together the story of his life, I can tell you that Trump is not speaking out of ignorance. He is, as he says, "very smart," and he understands the effects of what he says. And he has been signaling where he stands when it comes to race for many years.

Before declaring for president, Trump spent much of the Obama presidency as the loudest voice of the "birthers" who repeatedly claimed that Barack Obama was born, not in Hawaii, as documents prove, but abroad. And therefore he was not a U.S. citizen, and not a legitimate president, in Trump's eyes.

Birtherism was a barely disguised effort to paint the first black president as an un-American other and was energized by racial animus. Trump played the game long after others disavowed it and went further, suggesting the President might not be a Christian, as he says, but perhaps instead a Muslim.

The insinuation, like Trump's suggestion that the truth about Obama's college years was somehow clouded, was a divisive kind of gutter politics.

Always comfortable going further than others, Trump was the man who responded to the arrest of five minority youths in the 1989 assault of a jogger in New York's Central Park with newspaper ads that said, "Bring Back The Death Penalty, Bring Back the Police."

When Trump and I discussed the five -- who were coerced into false confessions but eventually cleared of the crime -- he wasn't interested in discussing any part of it except for his belief that they were bad characters who deserved no consideration for the years they spent in prison.

The Trump record on race also includes the ridiculous assertion, made in a TV interview with Bryant Gumbel, that "A well-educated black has a tremendous advantage over a well-educated white in terms of the job market."

Trump also appeared as a witness at a congressional hearing on Indian casinos -- they were his competitors -- and said, "Organized crime is rampant on Indian reservations." He then offered his belief that Native Americans at the hearing where he spoke "don't look like Indians to me, and they don't look like Indians to Indians."

Trump's tendency to play with racial fire is a longstanding element of his style and personality. When he was a marginal political figure, no one dwelled much on this problem. But as he lurches toward the Republican nomination for president, it's important to understand that he always knows what he is saying and always acts with an intention in mind. He is, after all, a really smart person.Story highlights On Thursday, President Trump held a news conference to announce his new nominee for secretary of labor

Kayleigh McEnany: For Trump supporters, the press conference was a victorious display of confidence

Kayleigh McEnany is a CNN commentator and a graduate of Harvard Law School. She studied politics at Oxford University. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely hers.

(CNN) While the establishment politicians and the left scoff at President Trump's Thursday press conference, Trump voters celebrate a victorious display of confidence. After a week of rampant speculation about selective leaks from the intelligence community, Trump boldly took to the East Room podium to address a room full of inquisitive journalists.

Undeterred by critical reporting, Trump did not cower behind a press secretary with carefully crafted words, as most politicians would do. Instead, he himself spoke directly to the American people, breaking through the interpretive lens of the media.

Kayleigh McEnany

Trump voters deemed his press conference a success for several reasons: He directed the conversation back to the issues; he showed his undeterred fortitude in tackling the tough questions; and he corrected the record.

According to the latest CNN poll , 90% of Republicans approve of the way Trump has handled the presidency thus far. Often left out of the media narrative are the reasons why Republicans feel this way. GOP voters look to the President and see a litany of accomplishments: a soaring stock market, withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, elimination of job-killing regulations, expedited permit approval, a hiring freeze on nonessential federal workers and a task force for reducing violent crime, among others. All this in just three weeks.

JUST WATCHED Trump: No Russia ties; Durbin: Release your taxes Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump: No Russia ties; Durbin: Release your taxes 05:29

These accomplishments, however, rarely garner media attention, except for Thursday when Trump listed them before a captive media audience, saying "I'm making this presentation directly to the American people with the media present. ..."

Read MoreChat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Aaron David Miller is a vice president and distinguished scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and author of "The End of Greatness: Why America Can't Have (and Doesn't Want) Another Great President." Miller was a Middle East negotiator in Democratic and Republican administrations. Follow him @aarondmiller2 . The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) A veteran Israeli negotiator once quipped to me that someone or something could just be dead -- or dead and buried.

Wednesday, before his meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and with Israel's active participation, Donald Trump may have moved the concept of a two-state solution as a cornerstone of US policy from the just dead to the permanently buried category.

Was this a tactical maneuver to help Netanyahu protect himself from his anti-two-state right wing, or does it reflect a more enduring shift in US policy? Here are my five takeaways.

1) Trump's departure

In what was tantamount to a radical shift in US policy, Trump moved from a 20-year-old approach to the Palestinian issue into unknown territory, seemingly offering Israelis and Palestinians a choice between one state or two. Whether because of imprecision or inexperience, Trump put into play a concept -- one state -- without defining what he meant.

Was it one in which Israelis and Palestinians live happily ever after as citizens in the same state, or one where Israel maintains control of much of the West Bank and its inhabitants, and Palestinians exist as second-class citizens or worse? No US President has ever endorsed a one-state solution, offered up such choice or so willfully appeared to distance himself from a concept that clearly faces long odds without knowing what comes next.

In a way, Trump converted US policy into an exercise akin to ordering from an old-school Chinese menu: Choose one from Column A and/or one from Column B.

2) Israel and the US on the same page

No doubt the strategic purpose of this first meeting was to make it unmistakably clear that the acrimony of the Obama years has passed, and a new age in the US-Israel relationship has dawned. And that means moving along three planes: improving the American President's personal relationship with Netanyahu; coordinating more closely on Iran; and, at least for now, working with Israel to establish a new paradigm for peacemaking that is less abrasive to Netanyahu's right-wing opposition and more compatible with his own ideology.

JUST WATCHED Former U.S. ambassador troubled by Trump answer Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Former U.S. ambassador troubled by Trump answer 04:34

Netanyahu's nemesis, Education Minister Naftali Bennett, warned the Prime Minister not to raise statehood, and he didn't. From there it was only a hop, skip and jump to what followed: Abandoning a two-state solution that Netanyahu always disliked and was never really committed to.

The Israeli prime minister quickly validated the President's thinking by making it clear we need "new avenues" of peacemaking, a reference to a regional approach that engages the neighboring Arab states.

3) Two-state idea is dead: What's the problem?

Let's be clear, today's abandonment of an idea that in many minds is already dead might not seem so radical and wild-eyed. But like many laws of gravity that operate in Trumpland, acting before thinking through the consequences seems to constitute a kind of prime directive. Sure, the two-state paradigm has been more fiction and illusion than functional concept these last few years. But sometimes fiction is useful, particularly when the concept is so widely supported -- at least in theory -- by so much of the Arab world, the international community and Israelis and Palestinians.

There is no tooth fairy and no angels, and yet they both serve a purpose for millions of people. This isn't entirely willful self-delusion; it's based on the notion that separation through negotiations into some kind of semi-sovereign Palestinian polity is likely the least bad solution to the conflict. And to casually abandon it without an alternative, due diligence, or consultations with any of the parties (minus the Israelis) calls into question US credibility as an effective broker.

4) So what is Plan B?

To hear the President talk Wednesday, you would think the United States is heading for the deal of the century -- a deal much bigger than you can imagine. From the little we know, the new approach is based on a very old Israeli idea: Involve the Arab states as a way to both recognize the will of the Israelis and to show support for the tough decisions Palestinians and, presumably, Israelis need to make.

What's new isn't the concept, but the emerging affinity between Israel and Sunnis Arabs as a result of common threats from Iran and jihadists. This new coincidence of interests is very real. But whether it applies to the Palestinian issue is another matter.

JUST WATCHED Arab Israeli MP warns of dangerous regression Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Arab Israeli MP warns of dangerous regression 06:57

As early as 2002, the Arab world offered up its Arab Peace Initiative , which in fact provided recognition to Israel. But the catch to this regional approach (and there always is one) was reciprocal and painful concessions from Israel, including a Palestinian state based on 1967 borders and a Palestinian capital in East Jerusalem.

Are key Arab states ready to endorse recognition -- even incrementally -- without serious Israeli concessions, including some kind of settlements freeze during negotiations? And have those states become so willful, stable and risk-ready that they will accept Netanyahu's Palestinian state and compel the Palestinians to accept some downsized polity that leaves Jerusalem under Israeli sovereignty? And will Netanyahu, pressed by his right wing coalition and ever risk-averse, be able to meet even minimum Arab and Palestinians demands?

5) Back to where we started?

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

The two-state solution may well be impossible to implement. It requires leadership on both sides and effective US mediation. All three are currently missing. And I'm not pushing for it now. Negotiations between Mahmoud Abbas and Netanyahu would almost certainly fail. But that does not mean that the Plan B or some variation can succeed.

Give Trump, Jared Kushner and Netanyahu a chance to test the one-state solution. We certainly couldn't produce a deal; perhaps they will.

However, in a conflict that has no status quo, where sovereignty, religious identity and a struggle to maintain holy sites remain unrequited, don't be surprised if you can't do a deal without addressing these challenges.Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Once again, President Trump has taken credit for the creation of thousands of jobs, and for helping keep jobs in the United States.

"If I didn't get elected, believe me, they would have left, and these jobs and these things that I'm announcing would never have come here," he said at his press conference Thursday.

The record is far more complicated.

Executives have credited Trump for a pro-business posture, including tax reform and deregulation. But in many cases the jobs he has promoted were part of previously announced plans.

Intel

On Feb. 8, Intel (INTC, Tech30) CEO Brian Krzanich announced at the White House that the tech giant would invest $7 billion in a new Arizona factory, creating 10,000 related jobs.

What Trump says: Trump said at a press conference Thursday that Intel "will move ahead with a new plant in Arizona that it was probably never going to move ahead with, and that will result in at least 10,000 American jobs."

Trump also promoted the Intel announcement at a joint press conference on Monday with the Canadian prime minister. Trump said Intel is "coming in with billions and billions of dollars of investment and thousands and thousands of jobs" because he's moved to lower taxes and decrease regulation.

The facts: The new computer chip factory will directly create about 3,000 "high-paying, high-wage, high-tech" jobs at its peak, according to Krzanich. In total, it will support more than 10,000 related jobs in the state.

The investment was made "in support of the tax and regulatory policies that we see the administration pushing forward," Krzanich said from the Oval Office.

But the project isn't entirely Trump's doing. In fact, Intel previously announced a $5 billion investment in the same Arizona chip factory with former President Barack Obama in 2011. That money was used to build the "shell" of the factory, but it was left unfinished because of a lack of "general demand for the product," according to company spokesman William Moss.

The project is resuming now that demand is picking up again.

"We're making this investment now to meet demand that we now expect," Moss told CNNMoney. "That said, we certainly join other companies in supporting the administration's pro-business and pro-investment goals."

General Motors

On Jan. 17, General Motors (GM) announced plans to invest at least $1 billion in U.S. factories. The company also committed to creating or retaining about 7,000 U.S. jobs in the next few years.

What Trump says: Trump, then the president-elect, gave GM and Walmart a shout-out via Twitter the day of the announcement, thanking the companies "for starting the big jobs push back into the U.S.!"

The facts: GM plans to shift 450 jobs from supplier plants in Mexico back to the U.S., and has pledged to protect 1,500 factory jobs that were previously at risk of leaving the country. GM is also adding 5,000 jobs to its finance and technology operations. Details will be rolled out later this year.

The company didn't mention Trump in its announcement.

"As the U.S. manufacturing base increases its competitiveness, we are able to further increase our investment, resulting in more jobs for America and better results for our owners," GM CEO Mary Barra said in a statement.

These plans have been in the works for some time, according to a company executive, and aren't part of any arrangement with President Trump.

Still, GM has been eager to show the new administration that it's serious about domestic job creation. Trump has attacked the automaker for making cars in Mexico and threatened to hit its imports with a "big" border tax. Barra serves on Trump's economic advisory council.

Walmart

On Jan. 17, Walmart (WMT), which employs more workers than any other American business, said it would add 10,000 U.S. jobs this year.

What Trump says: Trump offered praise for Walmart in the tweet about GM.

The facts: Walmart will add 10,000 jobs by expanding, renovating or relocating 59 Walmart and Sam's Club stores. It's also expanding online services. In addition, the project will create 24,000 temporary construction jobs, the company said.

Walmart didn't mention Trump in its announcement.

"With a presence in thousands of communities and a vast supplier network, we know we play an important role in supporting and creating American jobs," Walmart executive Dan Bartlett said in a statement.

It's unclear whether Trump or his policies affected the decision, announced days before the inauguration. Walmart declined to comment. CEO Doug McMillon serves on Trump's economic advisory council.

Lockheed Martin

On Jan. 13, defense giant Lockheed Martin (LMT) said it would add 1,800 jobs to its F-35 fighter jet program in Texas.

What Trump says: Trump mentioned Lockheed Martin's job creation in a Jan. 18 tweet. He said the jobs "came back because of me!"

The facts: Lockheed Martin CEO Marillyn Hewson told reporters about the new jobs while leaving a meeting at with the president-elect at Trump Tower. She said Lockheed is "close to a deal" that will bring down the cost of the F-35 and bring "thousands and thousands of jobs" to the U.S.

Trump criticized the cost of Lockheed Martin's F-35 program in late December. He said "the tremendous cost and cost overruns" led him to ask Boeing to price a comparable jet. Lockheed stock dropped.

Lockheed has every reason to charm Trump: It is the largest U.S. government contractor, according to the most recent most recent data. But these new jobs would have been added with or without him.

The positions Hewson announced are linked to production increases that have been in motion for years, a Lockheed spokesman told CNNMoney. Lockheed plans to deliver 150 jets in 2019, compared with 36 aircraft in 2014.

Amazon

On Jan. 12, Amazon (AMZN, Tech30) announced plans to create more than 100,000 U.S. jobs in the next 18 months.

What Trump says: "The announcement was made after the president-elect met with heads of several other tech companies and urge them to keep their jobs and production inside the United States," Sean Spicer, the incoming press secretary, said on a call with reporters that day. "The president-elect was pleased to have played a role in that decision by Amazon."

The facts: Amazon didn't mention Trump in its press release.

"Innovation is one of our guiding principles at Amazon, and it's created hundreds of thousands of American jobs," Amazon founder and CEO Jeff Bezos said in a statement. "These jobs are not just in our Seattle headquarters or in Silicon Valley -- they're in our customer service network, fulfillment centers and other facilities in local communities throughout the country."

Amazon would probably add tens of thousands of jobs regardless of who is president. The e-commerce company is growing rapidly, and Amazon adds fulfillment centers each year to expand its shipping operations.

"The bottom line is they were going to create jobs anyway, but it's the messaging that has changed," James Cakmak, an analyst with Monness, Crespi, Hardt, told CNNMoney. This announcement "appears to calibrate to current political sensitivities."

During the campaign, Trump repeatedly took on Bezos. He said once that Amazon is "getting away with murder tax-wise."

Chinese tech giant Alibaba

On Jan. 9, Jack Ma, the founder of Alibaba (BABA, Tech30), met with Trump and promised to help create 1 million jobs in the U.S. through the company's e-commerce platforms.

What Trump says: Ma "had no intention of doing it until I got elected," Trump said in an interview with Fox News. He also said Alibaba and other companies will spend a "tremendous amount of money" in the United States.

The facts: Ma is on record as early as 2015 saying he wanted to create U.S. jobs by helping businesses sell American goods to China, and Asia generally, on Alibaba's e-commerce platform.

After the January meeting, a reporter asked whether Ma and Trump talked about any investments in the U.S. "No," Ma replied. "We specifically talked about ... supporting 1 million businesses, especially in the Midwest of America."

Alibaba's pledge to help create 1 million jobs in the U.S. is vague and misleading. Ma is not going to build factories. He is not planning to set up Alibaba operations centers that would employ tech-savvy Americans. And he is not touting a big investment.

In other words, Ma isn't promising what most experts would define as job creation. He's talking about stimulating trade by helping 1 million small businesses sell American goods in China and Asia. Why the Midwest? Chinese consumers want more foreign food supplements and baby goods -- think milk products from a farm in Wisconsin.

Fiat Chrysler

On Jan. 8, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCAU) announced a $1 billion investment to expand factories in Ohio and Michigan, spurring the creation of 2,000 jobs by 2020.

What Trump says: "It's finally happening - Fiat Chrysler just announced plans to invest $1BILLION in Michigan and Ohio plants, adding 2000 jobs," Trump tweeted the next day.

The facts: The announcement is the latest phase in an "industrialization plan" the company announced a year ago. In a 2015 deal with the United Auto Workers union, the company committed to investing $5.3 billion in American plants to open up additional union jobs.

Fiat Chrysler CEO Sergio Marchionne said at a press conference that the decision was neither a response to Trump's pressure on the auto industry nor an effort to avoid Trump's ire.

"I wish I could give him credit for this," Marchionne told reporters. "But the thinking was in place beforehand."

Still, Trump's public criticism of GM and Ford factories in Mexico has surely made Fiat Chrysler and its investors wary. Marchionne called it "incredibly imprudent" for Chrysler to invest in Mexico until the industry gets some clarity on tariff threats.

Ford

On Jan. 3, Ford (F) announced that the company is canceling plans to build a plant in Mexico. Instead, the carmaker will invest $700 million in Michigan to create 700 U.S. jobs.

What Trump says: Trump hailed Ford's decision on Twitter the next day. "Thank you to Ford for scrapping a new plant in Mexico and creating 700 new jobs in the U.S.," he tweeted. "This is just the beginning - much more to follow."

After Fiat Chrysler's announcement the following week, the president-elect applauded Ford again. "Ford said last week that it will expand in Michigan and U.S. instead of building a BILLION dollar plant in Mexico," he tweeted. "Thank you Ford & Fiat C!"

The facts: The Ford Focus will now be built at an existing plant in Hermosillo, Mexico, and the $700 million investment in Ford's Flat Rock, Michigan, plant will allow the company to ramp up production of electric and self-driving cars.

Ford CEO Mark Fields said the investment is a "vote of confidence" in the pro-business environment Trump is working to foster. However, he stressed that Ford did not negotiate a deal with the president-elect.

"We didn't cut a deal with Trump," Fields told CNN's Poppy Harlow. "We did it for our business."

Falling small car sales probably played a major role.

At the same time, Trump's unrelenting criticism of Ford on the campaign trail could have been a factor.

Last year, Ford announced that it would invest $1.6 billion to transfer production of the Focus from Michigan to Mexico as a cost-saving move. Trump repeatedly blasted the automaker for sending U.S. jobs to Mexico (Ford said no jobs would be lost because of the move) and threatened to place a 35% tariff on Ford vehicles made in Mexico and sold in the U.S.

Japanese tech conglomerate SoftBank

On Dec. 6, after meeting with Trump, SoftBank founder Masayoshi Son pledged to invest $50 billion and create 50,000 jobs.

What Trump says: The president immediately claimed credit, tweeting, "Masa said he would never do this had we not won the election!"

The facts: Before the election, SoftBank (SFTBF)and the government of Saudi Arabia said they were forming a $100 billion fund to invest in tech companies around the world. Son told The Wall Street Journal that the money he promised to Trump would come from the SoftBank Vision Fund. A SoftBank spokesman disputed that Son said the investment would come entirely from the Vision Fund, saying, "it is a commitment from SoftBank."

SoftBank announced it would pump $1 billion into Florida startup OneWeb on Dec. 19, a move it said would create 3,000 jobs over the next four years. The company described the investment as "the first step" in Son's promise to Trump.

But it is not clear how much of the huge investment would have ended up in the U.S. regardless of who won the White House. The OneWeb deal wasn't cobbled together after the election. Softbank had been in talks with the startup for "a long time," said SoftBank spokesman Matthew Nicholson.

Sprint, which is also owned by SoftBank, confirmed late last year that it would "create or bring back to America" 5,000 jobs, also part of Son's commitment to create 50,000 jobs.

Carrier

On Nov. 30, air conditioning, heating and refrigeration company Carrier said it cut a deal with the incoming Trump administration to keep jobs in Indiana from moving to Mexico.

What Trump says: Trump touted his team's involvement in the Carrier deal from the start. "I am working hard, even on Thanksgiving, trying to get Carrier A.C. Company to stay in the U.S. (Indiana)," he tweeted on Nov. 24. "MAKING PROGRESS."

Once the deal was inked, Trump visited the plant to claim a victory. "Carrier stepped it up, and now they're keeping -- actually, the number is over 1,100 people," he said. "Which is so great."

The facts: The company said the deal was possible because the incoming administration emphasized "its commitment to support the business community and create an improved, more competitive U.S. business climate." It also credits an incentive package offered by the state of Indiana.

Carrier says the agreement really saved 800 jobs -- not 1,100 -- from moving to Mexico. The company confirmed to CNNMoney that it never planned to move 300 administrative and engineering positions from Indianapolis.

Carrier will receive $7 million in financial incentives from the state of Indiana over the next 10 years -- a fraction of what Carrier expected to save if it moved the jobs to Mexico.

Carrier's parent company, United Technologies (UTX), is a major defense contractor.Story highlights Free press needed "to preserve democracy as we know it," McCain said

Trump called the US press "the enemy of the American people"

(CNN) Sen. John McCain slammed President Donald Trump's attacks on the media this week by noting dictators "get started by suppressing free press."

It was a startling observation from a sitting member of Congress against the President of the United States, especially considering McCain is a member of Trump's party.

"I hate the press," the Arizona Republican sarcastically told NBC News' Chuck Todd on "Meet the Press." "I hate you especially. But the fact is we need you. We need a free press. We must have it. It's vital."

But he continued, "If you want to preserve -- I'm very serious now -- if you want to preserve democracy as we know it, you have to have a free and many times adversarial press," McCain said in the interview. "And without it, I am afraid that we would lose so much of our individual liberties over time. That's how dictators get started."

A clip of the interview, which airs in full on Sunday, was released Saturday afternoon.

Read MoreS.E. Cupp is the author of "Losing Our Religion: The Liberal Media's Attack on Christianity, " co-author of "Why You're Wrong About the Right" and a columnist at the New York Daily News. The opinions expressed in this commentary are her own.

(CNN) In Washington -- Hollywood for ugly people -- fashion doesn't usually get much attention, unless it's for all the wrong reasons. There was that, ahem, dress -- remember, it was blue? Or Sarah Palin's $695 beaded silk bolero jacket right out of "Three Amigos"?

And of course, there was President Obama's infamous tan suit moment. We were all Republicans that day, amiright?

But somehow, in this era of unprecedented partisan divide, Republicans and Democrats are coming together in the name of fashion. That is, they are in rare agreement that Kellyanne Conway should not be hawking Ivanka Trump's clothing from the perch of White House Counselor.

They are right to be offended. It's totally inappropriate, and possibly an ethics violation, to go on Fox News and "give a free commercial," as Conway herself called it, for the President's daughter's clothing line. "Go buy Ivanka's stuff," she said. "It's a wonderful line. I own some of it. Go buy it today, everybody. You can find it online."

This was in response to Nordstrom department stores winding back their relationship with the clothing line in response to slow sales. But Conway's defense was unseemly, unprofessional and, frankly, unacceptable.

Which is presumably why House Oversight Committee Chairman Rep. Jason Chaffetz, a Republican, called it "wrong, wrong, wrong," at a Utah townhall.

To show just how seriously he and his committee are taking the matter, he and Democrat Rep. Elijah Cummings will refer Conway for an ethics investigation, calling her remarks "clearly over the line."

"It should never have happened," he said, "and they better learn this lesson very quick."

Sounds like he means business.

I'll be honest, the episode isn't sitting well with me, but not for the reasons it should.

JUST WATCHED Kellyanne Conway: Go buy Ivanka's stuff Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Kellyanne Conway: Go buy Ivanka's stuff 01:54

Of course, Conway shouldn't hawk Trump family merch on television, even if in a moment of levity, she was trying to be funny. But, it's no excuse not to know -- especially considering Trump's labyrinthine web of business ventures -- that she shouldn't use the White House for someone's profit.

The more bothersome aspect of all this? This is what it takes to get the needle of a Republican's ethical Geiger counter to move?

Bravo to chairman Chaffetz for looking into Conway's couture calamity, but what about all the other stuff?

Back in January, before Trump was sworn in, Chaffetz seemed satisfied that Trump's myriad business ties wouldn't present any conflicts of interest. "I do believe that he has set up a plan where the revenue or the profits that are coming to the hotel will be given directly to the Treasury," he said, referring to Trump's Washington hotel.

He was unconcerned about the Emoluments Clause, which prevents presidents from accepting gifts from foreign governments. "Now the Emoluments Clause, he's going to have to have to look at, and we'll see how that rolls out. The president has a duty and obligation to comply with the law, but again he's exempt from almost all of these things."

He insisted then, and again just this week on CNN, that he was not going to go on a Democrat-directed "fishing expedition" to see if Trump is following the law.

It's no wonder his own constituents are angry. At a Utah townhall, the same one at which he scolded Conway for her actions, Chaffetz was booed and jeered by voters who wanted more investigations of Trump's businesses, yelling "Do your job!"

In a state that voted for Trump over Hillary Clinton a whopping 45.5% to 27.5%, the scene was a jarring one. But maybe it's what Chaffetz needed to see to remember that his job is to "exercise effective oversight over the federal government ... and work proactively to investigate and expose waste, fraud, and abuse," according to the committee website. Doesn't "proactively" actually describe a fishing expedition? Otherwise he's relying solely on fishmongers -- or whistleblowers -- to hand him investigations.

JUST WATCHED Kellyanne Conway's full interview with Tapper Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Kellyanne Conway's full interview with Tapper 25:19

But it goes beyond Chaffetz and his committee. Republicans in Congress, so giddy that there's an R in the White House again, seem willing to overlook a whole host of unsettling White House developments in order to protect Trump from the scrutiny he deserves.

When President Trump questioned the authority of a "so-called" federal judge on Twitter, where were separate powers enthusiasts in the Republican House and Senate to defend his legitimacy? Nowhere.

Are any Republicans concerned that Trump's national security adviser may have violated the Logan Act when he reportedly discussed sanctions with the Russian ambassador to the United States, before Trump was elected?

Will any Republicans say they mind that the President and his spokespeople regularly mislead or lie to the public about matters large and small on national television?

If Obama had called a raid in which a US soldier was killed a "winning mission" and then scolded an actual war hero who questioned it, Republicans would have launched one of three dozen investigations.

JUST WATCHED White House plugs Ivanka Trump's brand Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH White House plugs Ivanka Trump's brand 01:43

In fact, switch Obama for Trump in any one of these scenarios and Republicans would be calling the first few weeks of his presidency a zombie apocalypse. Instead, they seem content to whistle past the pile of corpses, pretending not to notice.

It seems like the outrage over Kellyanne Conway's comments might be a way of pretending to appear fair and responsible, instead of mustering up the courage to object to far more important and disturbing infractions.

I'm not buying it. If Republicans want to preserve any suggestion of ethical credibility, they'll start taking the Trump administration's many troubles more seriously.

Forget the clothes. Focus on the country.An appointee at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Shermichael Singleton, was fired for having criticized President Trump in an opinion piece he wrote in October 2016.Sal Moceri gets visibly agitated at the very mention of the word "NAFTA." He thinks the trade deal killed the American Dream.

"NAFTA was one of the worst contracts ever negotiated for the American worker," the 61-year-old Ford worker told CNNMoney.

Moceri has one of the coveted jobs that President Trump wants more of in America. He earns about $30 an hour fixing tools at a Ford (F) plant in Detroit. The job has allowed him to send four kids to college.

He calls himself a "lifelong Democrat." That is, until 2016, when he voted for Donald Trump, largely because of Trump's vow to redo NAFTA.

Michigan has lost nearly 300,000 manufacturing jobs since 2000. Moceri kept his job, but he says he has a lot of friends who didn't.

Many economists say there's no way those jobs will come back. The problem, they argue, is that machines took over. One study by Ball State University says 87% of American manufacturing jobs have been lost to robots. Only 13% have disappeared because of trade.

But workers in Michigan think the experts have it wrong. They don't blame robots at all. In fact, they love the machines.

"Automation is great. I want it to excel. I want more computers. I want more robots," says Moceri.

Frank Pitcher, a fellow Ford worker and UAW union member, agrees. He strongly believes robots have saved workers' backs and caused Ford employees to become a lot more skilled.

Robots have "replaced a lot of jobs that actually injured people," says Pitcher, who is about to turn 50 and glad his body isn't busted up. "I don't fear the technology or the automation. I welcome it."

CNNMoney spent a week in the Detroit metro region talking to current and former manufacturing workers. Almost all said the same thing: It's not the robots that took U.S. jobs, it's NAFTA.

Related: Trump gives America's 'poorest white town' hope

'I've had to let most of my workers go'

A giant American flag hangs on the wall of Matt Seely's small manufacturing shop in Detroit. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, his company, Quality Bending and Threading, was buzzing. He employed 17 workers. The phone rang all the time with orders from the big auto companies and defense contractors for specialty steel parts.

Today he employs just five people. He blames NAFTA for the decline.

"There was a point in time before NAFTA came in where there was a machine shop like this literally on every corner in the metro Detroit area," Seely says. Now he thinks people don't want to pay for American-made when they can get it cheaper from Mexico.

NAFTA was the trade deal President Bill Clinton signed with Mexico and Canada that went into effect in January 1994. It allows many goods to be imported into the U.S. from those countries without being taxed.

"We're not trading equally, and that's the real issue," says Seely. He believes it's not fair the U.S. ran a $63 billion trade deficit with Mexico last year, meaning the U.S. bought more from Mexico than it sold to Mexico.

Seely says he was never much of a political guy, until Trump camp along. He and his wife volunteered for Trump and ended up running a campaign office. Trump's son Eric toured Seely's factory.

Trump has clearly tapped into this anti-NAFTA fervor. He campaigned hard in Michigan, holding four rallies there in the final week before the election. He vowed that "Detroit -- the Motor City -- will come roaring back." He ended up winning Michigan by 10,704 votes.

Related: Mexico ready to retaliate by hurting American corn farmers

Trump calls NAFTA a 'catastrophe'

Since taking office, Trump has called NAFTA a "catastrophe" and promised to start renegotiating it this spring. It's exactly what Ken Sultes, another Ford worker and union member, wants to hear.

It's been "a downward spiral as far as jobs leaving this country," laments Sultes, who loves cars and wore a BMW ball cap to his interview. He also thinks the experts have it wrong about what's been hurting his industry.

"It's not like a robot comes to a line and 500 people lose their job," he explains. Sultes says only a few jobs are replaced by machines at a time. Typically, the displaced workers stay in the factory and move to another job.

In contrast, manufacturing workers are well aware of when there's a big factory closing. When that happens, hundreds of jobs go to another state -- or overseas.

While Trump and many workers blame NAFTA for the Rust Belt's woes, the data shows a far more murky story. Michigan actually gained manufacturing jobs after NAFTA was signed in 1994. The real downturn didn't begin until 2000, around the time China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.

The Great Recession caused more losses, although Michigan has actually rebounded from the worst of the crisis. Over 150,000 manufacturing jobs have come back since the low of 2009. It's helped that U.S. car sales have been at record levels lately.

Related: I raised 3 kids on minimum wage. Here's what Trump should know

Michigan: Some jobs are back, but at what pay?

While there's a lot of worry in Michigan, the state's unemployment rate just hit 5%, the lowest level since 2001. That implies there are jobs in Michigan again.

But workers likes Sultes and Pitcher argue the jobs around now aren't middle-class jobs, especially for workers just getting started. Even at the auto plants, the big companies like Ford have created a "two-tier system" where they pay some employees about $30 an hour and others a far lower wage of about $20.

Many workers blame NAFTA -- especially cheap Mexican labor -- for pulling down U.S. wages.

"We never had a two-tiered employment where I worked before the NAFTA program," says Moceri, shaking his head. The company basically said, "If you don't accept this lower wage, this job will be gone."

-- CNNMoney's Logan Whiteside and Richa Naik contributed to this story.Daniel Shapiro served as US Ambassador to Israel from 2011 until the end of the Obama administration. The opinions in this article belong to the author.

(CNN) President Barack Obama and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu met 17 times during the course of their eight years in office together. I was the only person on the US side to attend each meeting.

These encounters were generally cordial and often productive, befitting the close alliance between our countries. They were also occasionally -- and famously -- frustrating and contentious . But I can never recall even one that looked as downright weird as the meeting Wednesday between President Donald Trump and Netanyahu at the White House.

It was not for lack of friendship and conviviality. Netanyahu and Trump seem to share genuine warmth and mutual affection. Similar in age, outlook and personal style, they seem a more natural fit than Obama and Netanyahu ever did. Many in Israel cheered Trump's victory, believing he would be friendlier to Israel's interests.

But as he tallies up the points from this week's meeting, Netanyahu might be wondering if Trump's victory was really such a great prize for him personally.

Netanyahu will give credit where it's due. He and Trump are of like mind on Iran, believing that the nuclear agreement was a bad deal and that additional pressures should be brought to be bear in response to Iranian provocations, like its ballistic missile tests.

The two leaders also have a common desire to pursue a regional strategy that draws on Israel's warming ties with Arab states that share its fear of Iran and ISIS, before restarting talks with the Palestinians. And Trump spoke clearly and forcefully against the way Palestinian youth are educated to hate Israelis, making it harder to build toward an eventual end to the conflict.

But there were numerous displays of gaps between the leaders and other off-key notes, as well. While expressed in friendly tones, these moments suggested that some of the issues that divided Netanyahu and Obama will continue to mark differences between Israel and the US in the Trump era, while other unusual features of the new administration may make Netanyahu, to his own surprise, miss no-drama Obama.

Start with the traditional US-Israel divide on Israeli settlements in the West Bank. In an echo of many moments shared with Obama, Netanyahu and Trump were anything but on the same page on this subject. Trump left no doubt that, while he will give Netanyahu space for now on defining the endgame with the Palestinians, he expects to see significant restrictions on expansion of settlements. Even in their tap dance around the two-state solution -- Trump said he has no preference between one state and two states, as long as both sides agree; we can expect that to last only until Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and presidential envoy and son-in-law Jared Kushner make their first visit to the region and meet with Arab and Palestinian leaders.

JUST WATCHED Trump: I can live with 2 or 1-state solution Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump: I can live with 2 or 1-state solution 02:28

Then there was the surrounding context of the meeting. As Netanyahu arrived late Tuesday in Washington, a full-scale crisis was erupting in the White House. Less than a month into the administration, President Trump's national security adviser, retired Army Gen. Michael Flynn, was forced to resign over his contact with the Russian ambassador during the transition and misrepresentations about those conversations to Vice President Mike Pence.

The crisis is not close to being contained, with new revelations about contact between the Trump campaign and Russian officials, bitter recriminations among White House staff and the prospect of Congressional investigations.

The chaos undoubtedly affected the quality and substance of the meeting as well. Flynn had been a key interlocutor with Netanyahu's top aides in several rounds of discussions to prepare for the visit, and his absence must have been felt.

And the allegations themselves underscore a potential area of friction. Trump's determination to develop a closer partnership between the US and Russia, which could help explain Flynn's apparent reassurance to the Russian ambassador in December when President Obama imposed sanctions on Russia over its interference in the US election, poses a significant challenge to Israeli interests.

Both Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin have expressed interest in linking US and Russian military operations against ISIS in Syria. But it is difficult to see Russia cooperating with the United States in Syria without seeking greater validation of its own long-term military presence and acceptance of the permanence of Bashar al-Assad's bloody regime.

Among the strategic beneficiaries would be Assad's allies, Iran and Hezbollah. Russia's friends in the Middle East are not Israel's friends, and Israel will have to navigate a treacherous path to ensure its core interest of preventing a strengthened Iranian/Hezbollah presence in Syria, without clashing with Trump over his Russia play.

Finally, Netanyahu was treated to the remarkable and disturbing spectacle of Trump, when asked a direct question by an Israeli journalist Moav Vardi about the rise in anti-Semitic incidents since his election, failing to even mention anti-Semitism, much less condemn it.

Follow CNN Opinion Join us on Twitter and Facebook

It was left for the Prime Minister himself to vouch for Trump's friendship for the Jewish people after the president himself, in his rambling answer, preferred to focus on his Electoral College win and his Jewish family members.

In sum, Netanyahu experienced what many world leaders seeking to establish ties and advance their interests with the new administration may go through: wading through a bewildering morass of traditional US policy, ideological revamp and seat-of-the-pants improvisation, with accompanying measures of chaos, scandal and Trumpspeak.

One wishes these leaders luck making sense of it all.Story highlights Trump took a question from Ryan

"Do you want to set up the meeting?" Trump asked

(CNN) President Donald Trump on Thursday asked April Ryan, an African-American reporter and longtime White House correspondent, if she would arrange for him a meeting with the Congressional Black Caucus.

Late in a rollicking and unexpected news conference, Trump took a question from Ryan, who asked about his campaign promise to revitalize the American urban centers he frequently described in bleak terms.

Trump responded first by telling Ryan that her question was "very professional and very good," then claimed he received "a much higher percentage of the African-American vote than a lot of people thought" because of his attention to the "inner cities."

The moment when Trump asks @AprilDRyan if she wants to set up his meeting with the Congressional Black Caucus. https://t.co/XXa7dzbPmT  Daniella Diaz (@DaniellaMicaela) February 16, 2017

When questioned on whether he planned to meet with the Congressional Black Caucus, a group of African-American lawmakers on Capitol Hill, Trump asked Ryan if she would organize it herself.

"I'll tell you what, do you want to set up the meeting?" he said. "Do you want to set up the meeting? Are they friends of yours?

Read MoreWashington (CNN) President Donald Trump rejected the long-established US framework for Middle East peacemaking at a White House visit with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu Wednesday as he announced his desire to reach "the ultimate deal."

In staking his claim to a prize that has eluded many a leader before him, Trump previewed the nascent outlines of an approach that -- if he sticks with it -- ditches bipartisan orthodoxy, borrows some old ideas and, Middle East experts say, will be no easier to pull off now than in the past.

As Trump declared his deep support for the Jewish state, he abandoned the bedrock principle that the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will come via two states for two peoples. Instead, he referred to the possibility of an Arab-backed peace process, an idea that's been floating around since the beginning of this century without producing results.

"The United States will encourage a peace and really, a great peace deal," Trump declared at a news conference alongside Netanyahu. "We'll be working on it very, very diligently."

Asked whether he was abandoning the idea of a two-state solution, Trump said, "I'm looking at two-state and one-state, and I like the one that both parties like."

He continued, "If Israel and the Palestinians are happy, I'm happy with the one they like the best."

He also said at one point, "It is the parties themselves that must directly negotiate. Both sides will have to make compromises." Then turning to Netanyahu, he added a question: "You know that, right?"

UN Sec Gen: 'No plan B'

UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, speaking in Cairo alongside the Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs, stressed that the Israelis and Palestinians must not abandon a commitment to a two-state solution.

"There is no Plan B to the situation between Palestinians and Israelis but a two-state solution and that everything must be done to preserve that possibility," he said in remarks to the press.

The night before Netanyahu's arrival at the White House, senior administration officials cast doubt on the two-state solution, which the international community still holds as the basic foundation of any agreement. The US explicitly called for that arrangement under Republican President George W. Bush and Democratic President Barack Obama.

The Trump official's comments drew a response from PLO Executive Committee Member Hanan Ashrawi, who said that if Trump was "trying to create alternative realities, then he should spell out what the options are. A one-state solution would require equal rights and citizenship for all, unless he is advocating an apartheid state."

There are growing questions about whether a two-state solution is even possible, given Israel's continued settlement building, said Diana Buttu, a former spokeswoman for the Palestinian Liberation Organization who now teaches at Harvard University.

Since Trump's inauguration, Israel has announced 6,000 new settlement homes and legalized settler outposts in the West Bank.

"They've done that for 20 years, say they want a two-state solution, build settlements and destroy Palestinian homes," Buttu said. "That's not the behavior of someone who wants peace."

As a result, young Palestinians are "increasingly talking very openly about a struggle for one person, one vote," Buttu said.

Many Israelis, on the other hand, say that the Palestinians haven't warmly embraced a two-state solution either, pointing to polls showing that the idea has dropping support among the Palestinian public and arguing that its leaders haven't been willing to participate in the direct talks needed to reach an agreement.

Netanyahu, who endorsed the idea of two states in 2009 under pressure from the Obama administration, sidestepped questions about whether he still supports the concept Wednesday, saying instead he wanted to avoid "labels" and talk substance: the need for Palestinians to recognize Israel as a Jewish state and the need for Israel to have overriding security control. It's not clear how Netanyahu is going to persuade them to come to the table.

He also didn't give a direct response when asked whether he would comply with Trump's request at the news conference that he "hold back" on settlement expansion.

Pressed by reporters later Wednesday, the Israeli Prime Minister replied, "I think we'll try to find a common understanding that is consistent with pursuit of peace and security."

It was an early indication that getting the parties to comply with US aspirations in the Middle East can be a challenge.

Natan Sachs, a fellow at the Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution, said that for Netanyahu, the point isn't so much "to get to the deal with Palestinians, but to change the parameters and include the Arab states. That would be good for Israel if there is a deal with Palestinians, and it would be good for Israel if there isn't a deal."

States aligned with Israel in their dislike of Iran include Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states. Israel has forged close but quiet security ties with these Sunni-majority nations over that shared view of Tehran. Now, Netanyahu is hoping to make those relationships more open and win Arab recognition of Israel by drawing these countries into negotiations on Mideast peace.

"I believe the great opportunity for peace comes from a regional approach," Netanyahu said at the White House, "from involving our newfound Arab partners in the pursuit of a broader peace and peace with the Palestinians."

JUST WATCHED Netanyahu: No greater supporter than Trump Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Netanyahu: No greater supporter than Trump 02:44

Trump described the idea of Arab involvement as "actually a much bigger deal, a much more important deal in a sense. It would take in many, many countries and it would cover a very large territory."

Trump has said his chief negotiator for Middle East peace will be his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, who has already been meeting with influential Arab leaders, such as Jordan's King Abdullah and UAE ambassador to the US Yousef al-Otaiba.

"I think we have some pretty good cooperation from people in the past who would never, ever have even thought about doing this," Trump said, "so we'll see how that works."

Sachs said that Trump seems to think the regional approach is new.

"It's not," he said, pointing to a 2001 Saudi initiative that proposed Arab recognition of Israel in exchange for peace with the Palestinians and Syria and an independent Palestinian state whose capital was East Jerusalem.

It was adopted by the Arab League in 2002 and re-endorsed in 2007 but has yet to lead to a resolution to the conflict.

While Jordan and Egypt have formal peace deals with Israel, Gulf states don't have formal diplomatic relations with Jerusalem and would have to sell a deal to their citizens before publicly improving ties.

"They've got to be able to sell their closeness to Israel to their own domestic politics as, among many other good things, something that's helpful to the Palestinians," said Hussein Ibish, a senior fellow at the Arab Gulf States Institute. "The idea that Israel wouldn't have to do much on the Palestinians and have major progress with the Gulf states, that's a misread of the political dynamics."Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.Washington (CNN) President Donald Trump widens his search for a new national security adviser this weekend amid concerns in Washington that the forced resignation of Michael Flynn leaves the White House unprepared to face any sudden foreign policy crisis.

Trump is expected to interview several candidates to replace Flynn, whose short tenure ended when he was asked to resign after misleading Vice President Mike Pence about his pre-inauguration calls with the Russian ambassador.

White House spokesman Sean Spicer told reporters that Trump will speak to former US ambassador to the United Nations John Bolton, acting national security adviser Gen. Keith Kellogg, West Point Superintendent Lt. Gen. Robert Caslen, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, who directs the Army Capabilities Integration Center, and "potentially more" candidates. Those meetings will take place Sunday, Spicer said.

Two other candidates, former Army Gen. Stanley McChrystal and former CIA Director David Petraeus, are no longer in the mix, sources told CNN Friday night. The front-runner for the post, Vice Adm. Bob Harward, dropped out of consideration apparently over concerns that he could not bring his own staff to the National Security Council.

There were signs of strong support inside and outside the administration for Bolton. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, told CNN in an interview that the foreign policy veteran would make a "very, very, strong" national security adviser because he understands the threat from "radical Islamic terrorism."

Bolton, a controversial figure who had to secure a recess appointment to serve as President George W. Bush's ambassador to the United Nations after failing to win Senate confirmation, is emerging as a strong favorite among political staffers on the NSC.

While there is a lot of affection for Kellogg, the current NSC chief of staff, supporters believe that Bolton brings a mix of anti-establishment credentials that fit Trump's political temperament and in-depth knowledge of Washington and how the foreign policy process works, a senior administration official said.

The official said Bolton is close to both CIA Director Mike Pompeo and Pence, who is "extremely powerful at this point" and so may have some sway on who gets the job. In the end, however, it will be up to Trump to decide who he is most comfortable working with. Should Bolton get the job, political staffers want Kellogg to stay on as NSC chief of staff.

The sense of limbo is causing concern among lawmakers and foreign policy experts who understand how the National Security Council corrals rival foreign policy power centers in the government and its crucial role at a time of crisis.

"There is no doubt after the departure of Flynn and everything that led up to it that the NSC is in a little bit of chaos," Republican Rep. Adam Kinzinger of Illinois told CNN Friday. GOP Sen. John McCain also questioned the state of White House foreign policy earlier in the week.

Every presidency brings change and uncertainty to American foreign policy. But Trump's arrival in the White House has been especially disorientating for US allies, since he adopted positions on the campaign trail -- for example, questioning the value of US alliances in Europe and Asia that have underpinned post-World War II peace -- that appeared to threaten wholesale upheaval in the international system. Adding personnel uncertainties to that mix is underscoring the sense of instability that Trump has brought international relations.

As they await their new boss, national security staffers are hunkering down and forging ahead with their work.

One senior administration official strongly refuted claims that the NSC was in chaos, arguing that it is functioning exactly as it should be, despite Flynn's departure, and is primed for any crisis that would arise.

"It is dead wrong," said the official, who requested anonymity to discuss a sensitive situation. "The NSC was instrumental in the rollout of the Venezuela drug kingpin designation, the NSC arranged a meeting with Venezuelan dissidents with the President. The NSC is instrumental in setting up, prepping and briefing all the President's foreign leader calls of which there are a couple every day."

"Everyone is carrying on as normal," the official said, pointing to a string of successful meetings between Trump and foreign leaders in recent weeks.

Harward's decision not to take the job revealed the fact that potential candidates will likely have to agree to keep on staffers already brought into the NSC.

In a statement to CNN, the former Navy SEAL cited family reasons for his decision. But a friend of Harward said he was reluctant to sign up because the White House seems so chaotic. A Republican official told CNN that Harward was not convinced he would be able to bring in his own staff.

Trump's top aides have made clear that candidates that most of the top political appointees who came in with Flynn will stay -- in a bid to avoid disarray.

"We are in an unprecedented situation," the official said. "Somebody coming in is going to have to understand it is not going to be the way it would have been had they been picked November 10 and had a whole transition to pick their staff."

The visits of British Prime Minister Theresa May, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, however, sent reassuring signals to US allies.

One senior member of one of the delegations said that Trump and those around him had pleasantly surprised their visitors with evidence that they were beginning to understand the complexity of foreign policy and managing alliances, despite their inexperience.

Internal tensions

Normally, a vacancy for a national security adviser would spark intense jockeying for position throughout the national security establishment in Washington -- given the job's proximity to the President and central role as the White House's foreign policy first responder.

And Trump's failure to find a quick replacement for Flynn is shining a spotlight on the internal tensions in his administration.

Harward's decision revived Washington scuttlebutt about the extent to which political influences are weighing on the national security team in the White House following Trump's executive order reserving a spot for his controversial adviser Steve Bannon in NSC principals committee meetings.

"If I had been in his position, being offered the top job in national security, a job that anyone in that profession would want, I would want to make sure I had control over the staff and that the NSC was not being influenced by the President's political advisers," said Tony Blinken, a former deputy secretary of state and deputy national security adviser for President Barack Obama.

"I suspect that Bob Harward, looking at this job, looking at this possibility would have said, 'Yes, but that has to stop,' and if he didn't get those assurances, he is probably right not to do it," Blinken told CNN's Brooke Baldwin.

Bannon is not the only member of Trump's political team who has carved out a sphere of influence on foreign policy. The President's son-in-law Jared Kushner emerged as the key interlocutor between foreign leaders and the new president during the transition period and early in the new administration, diplomats said.

Trying to keep security council stable

The official said the White House is concerned that the council -- an organization that is already in an uneasy position after Flynn's early exit -- would be further destabilized if the top staffers in the organization were asked to resign in order to make room for the next national security adviser's staff.

"They don't want to see big changes at the NSC and therefore that is going to be a condition for anybody taking the job," the official said.

But military officers especially, one White House aide said, bring with them a host of people, so encouraging staff stay could run counter to what the next National Security Adviser would want.

Harward's decision not to accept the job also raised eyebrows because of the unspoken military code that when a President calls, service personnel salute and accept the mission.

Who has Trump's ear?

The Defense Department has also welcomed the somewhat looser oversight being conducted by the Trump White House, which has had a lighter hand so far than the former Obama administration.

That new regime has also been noted at the State Department, where one official said that there was little "connective tissue" between Foggy Bottom and the West Wing.

Former Obama administration State Department spokesman and White House Communications Director Jen Psaki warned that a prolonged vacuum on the NSC would soon start reverberating around the world.

"If you are working in an embassy or in a diplomatic role for countries around the world, you are wondering who has Trump's ear, who is speaking on behalf of the United States," Psaki said on CNN International on Friday.

Still, one of the ironies of the uncertainty surrounding the NSC is that foreign policy -- at least as far as it relates to visits by key foreign leaders -- has been one of the smoothest areas of the administration so far.Zhang Baohui is Professor of Political Science and Director of Centre for Asian Pacific Studies at Lingnan University in Hong Kong. The opinions expressed here are solely his.

(CNN) On Feb 10, the world was surprised by a phone call between US president Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping.

A White House statement described their conversation as "extremely cordial." Most importantly for Xi, Trump affirmed US commitment to the "One China" policy.

This phone call, together with a personal letter from Trump to Xi two days earlier , which expressed US interests in seeking "constructive relations" with China, removed many of the uncertainties generated by Trump's earlier comments that the "One China" principle was negotiable.

Domestic setbacks

One plausible explanation of Trump's apparent return to the "One China" principle could be his rising setbacks on the domestic front.

When Trump threatened to link the "One China" principle with Chinese concessions in a number of issue areas, he was rolling with a sense of invincibility after the election.

Foreign leaders were falling over each other to court him. At home and abroad, Trump looked mighty.

However, after assuming the office, Trump has encountered massive domestic frustrations.

His multiple new policy initiatives have run into fierce criticism and opposition by the public, media, and other branches of the government.

According to a poll by CNN /ORC, a majority, 53%, disapprove of the way Trump handles his job, marking the highest disapproval for a new elected president since polls began to track these results.

The result has been that Trump has become increasingly frustrated and vexed by domestic challenges.

The last thing Trump needs is a major fight with China, which would promise to be very nasty with uncertain outcomes.

It is therefore highly likely that Trump opted to return to the "One China" principle after a rethinking about the relative priorities of the domestic and foreign policy agendas of his administration.

China courts the Trumps

Trump's return to the "One China" principle may also be an outcome of China's successful diplomatic efforts, through both conventional and unconventional tactics.

In public, China has been firm in sending out a consistent message to Trump that the "One China" principle involved its fundamental core interests and it will to take a stand and fight to the end.

It has simultaneously pursued unconventional, backdoor approaches to shape his China policy.

Beijing is keenly aware that Trump relies closely on a very small group of advisers to guide him on policy issues, including his son-in-law Jared Kushner and daughter Ivanka Trump.

As such, China has tried to directly influence the first family to smooth relations with Trump. In fact, soon after Trump's election, Kushner attended a dinner hosted by Chinese business tycoon Wu Xiaohui, who presides over Anbang Insurance Group that has an asset of US$285 billion and close ties to the ruling elite of China.

Then on February 1, Trump's daughter Ivanka paid a surprise visit to China's embassy in Washington to attend a Chinese New Year reception

Behind closed doors, China may have succeeded in proactively shaping Trump's position on the "One China" policy through both deterrence and accommodation.

Ways forward

While Trump's stated commitment to the "One China" principle has at least removed a short-term obstacle to Sino-US relations, the future of the bilateral relationship remains challenged.

Multiple issues, ranging from trade, the South China Sea or North Korea's nuclear challenge, may still lead both countries down the path to conflict.

JUST WATCHED Trump and China: What's at stake? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump and China: What's at stake? 02:24

The US and China can do a number of things to minimize conflicts and maximize cooperation.

While the US should refrain from using the "One China" principle to pressure Beijing on the trade front, the latter must consider serious concessions.

The Trump administration does have a legitimate complaint given the massive trade deficit on the US side.

China thus needs to address the "fair trade" issue. Likely concessions include greater access by US firms to the Chinese market.

On the South China Sea issue, the Trump administration's recent statements have been encouraging.

Secretary of Defense James Mattis, during on a recent trip to Japan, expressed that there is no need for the US military to "take drastic" moves in the South China Sea.

Moreover, he said that the US would primarily rely on diplomacy to resolve the South China Sea disputes.

China must not read this as a sign of weakness. Instead, China should refrain from further actions that may escalate the South China Sea conflict with the United States.

Finally, China should make more sincere efforts in containing the nuclear ambitions of North Korea.

Greater efforts by Beijing will not only contribute to regional stability but also strengthen Sino-US cooperation on the issue.

Such efforts can convince the Trump administration that China is indeed doing its best to help the United States with this thorny security issue.London (CNN) The British government has formally rejected the online petition calling for President Donald Trump's state visit to the UK to be canceled or downgraded.

In a statement from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office posted Tuesday on the petition's web page , the government said it "recognizes the strong views expressed by the many signatories of this petition, but does not support this petition."

The statement added that the invitation, which Prime Minister Theresa May extended to President Trump during her visit to Washington last month, "reflects the importance of the relationship between the United States of America and the United Kingdom."

No date fixed yet

Final dates for Trump's visit have yet to be agreed, but the Foreign Office reply to the petition confirmed "HM Government believes the President of the United States should be extended the full courtesy of a State Visit . We look forward to welcoming President Trump once dates and arrangements are finalized."

The petition attracted over 1.8 million signatures, easily crossing the 100,000 signature threshold required for it to be debated in Parliament.

Embarrassment to Queen

The petition stopped short of calling for a ban on Trump's proposed UK visit but said he "should not be invited to make an official State Visit because it would cause embarrassment to Her Majesty the Queen."

The Government was compelled to reply to the petition, which recognized Trump's right to come to the UK because it garnered more

than 10,000 signatures.

Downing Street protest on January 30 against US President Donald Trump.

MPs are scheduled to debate the petition in the House of Commons on Monday.

They will also debate a rival 310,000-strong petition in support of the state visit after they both reached the 100,000 signatures threshold to be considered for discussion in Parliament, the Press Association reported.

Support for the call to downgrade Trump's visit snowballed after he imposed a travel ban on nationals from seven mainly Muslim countries.

Gun salute for Trump

May's invitation to Trump, which was made during a joint press conference in Washington last month, caused anger both inside Parliament and with the public.

Last month, in an letter to The Times newspaper the former head of the Foreign Office, Peter Ricketts, said May had put the Queen in a "very difficult position" and should protect her by downgrading Trump's invitation to an "official visit".

Horses ride down the Mall during the Diamond Jubilee Carriage Procession from Westminster Hall to Buckingham Palace in London on June 5, 2012.

This would deprive President Trump of a ride in the Queen's carriage, gun salutes, a banquet at Buckingham Palace and other ceremonial honors.

An official visit usually means just talks with the Prime Minister and a low-profile courtesy call on the monarch.

No US President has received a state visit in his first year in office, making Trump's invite unprecedented.

President Barack Obama was afforded the honor 28 months into his tenure, while George W. Bush was extended the invite after 32 months.

Queen Elizabeth II with President Barack Obama, Michelle Obama and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.

House of Commons Speaker opposed to Trump address

Last week the Speaker of the House of Commons, John Bercow, said he was "strongly opposed" to letting Trump address lawmakers during his visit because of Parliament's "opposition to racism and sexism."

Bercow is one of three parliamentary officials who must approve any invitation for someone to speak in Westminster Hall, the venue typically used for grand occasions of state.

Speaking in response to a motion signed by 163 MPs calling for Trump not to be afforded a Westminster Hall audience, Bercow said "an address by a foreign leader to both Houses of Parliament is not an automatic right, it is an earned honor." His comments have led to calls for his resignation from fellow Conservative MP's who support Trump.Former Secret Service agent Jonathan Wackrow tells CNN's Jim Sciutto that the logistical demands of protecting President Donald Trump, his family and their multiple homes are testing the agency's limits.Communications between campaign staff and foreign governments are not unusual, but the frequency and proximity of Trump to those involved raised a red flag.

Source: CNN(CNN) The anti-Trump protests outside Downing Street were lively and vocal. The chants ranged from the expletive-ridden to the direct: "No State Visit!" was a popular one.

The demonstration was part of a fierce backlash in the UK to the announcement last week by Prime Minister Theresa May that US President Donald Trump had accepted an invitation conveyed from the Queen for a state visit later this year.

The number of signatories on a petition calling for Trump's state visit to be cancelled has soared past 1.7 million -- and the issue will now be debated in Parliamen t. Among those to have signed it are Jeremy Corbyn, leader of the opposition Labour party, and Ruth Davidson, the leader of May's Conservative party in Scotland.

Anger has intensified over Trump's decision to impose a 90-day ban on travellers from seven Muslim-majority nations and to restrict refugee arrivals -- enacted in an executive order signed hours after May left the White House.

All this has left the Queen at the centre of a political firestorm -- not a comfortable place for a constitutional monarch.

In a letter to Tuesday's Times newspaper, the respected former head of the Foreign Office, Peter Ricketts, said May had put The Queen in a "very difficult position" and should protect her by downgrading Trump's invitation to an "official visit". Such a trip would be shorn of the ceremonial hoop-la that The President is currently expecting, involving only talks with the Prime Minister and a low-profile courtesy call on the monarch.

May is in a precarious position. If she bows to pressure and downgrades the trip she risks more than losing face: it could cost her a crucial trade deal she's been working on with President Trump.

It could also test relations with Buckingham Palace: Ricketts noted in his letter to the Times that the government's role in protecting the monarch from political controversy was being "put under strain because of the ill-urged advice to the Queen to rush out an invitation to President Trump".

As Ricketts' letter made clear, the Queen doesn't actually have a say on who is invited on a state visit to Britain. Instead, she acts on the advice of the Foreign Office in consultation with Downing Street. May has the ultimate sign-off and only she can alter or withdraw the invitation.

So far the Prime Minister is resolute: the invitation stands, she said at a press conference with the Irish prime minister on Monday evening.

State visits are a powerful diplomatic tool for British governments and they are used unashamedly. Who can resist a sleepover and state banquet at Buckingham Palace, hosted by the Queen, with the pomp and pageantry of a horse-drawn carriage procession thrown in? If anyone can out-bling Donald Trump, it's Elizabeth Windsor -- and we already know Trump's mother was a fan

Whether The Queen is a fan of the President is a different matter and, not to put too fine a point on it, irrelevant. Her role is to stay above politics and over the decades she has hosted all sorts of controversial figures from Nicolae Ceaucescu of Romania to Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe. Never have we heard a public utterance of her personal feelings about any of her official guests -- she's a stickler for protocol.

The government has its own reasons for wanting to improve relations with the guests, and whether or not the Queen relishes the idea of hosting President Trump, she will oblige, as is her duty.

We don't know how Trump would react to a downgraded invitation but he's unlikely to welcome it and at worst it could be taken as an insult and cause a diplomatic rift.

The Queen no doubt eagerly awaits the guidance from her ministers.