Well, the book is called “Super Genes,” and when I say "Super Genes", it's a combination of the activity of your genome, your microbiome, and what we call the epigenome. We are born with 23,000 genes. That's what started our life after your parents came back from that picnic. That's how we started, but then on the way out from the mother's womb, and then shortly thereafter, we acquired 3.3 more million genes, so 150 times more genes that are of bacterial origin. The number of bacteria outnumbers our cells 10 to 1, but the number of bacterial genes outnumbers our human genes by a factor of 150 to
Yes, less than 10%. We are a few human cells hanging on to a
bacteria colony. We are the awakening of bacterial consciousness.
Which decided to say, "Who am I?" Anyway, so that's the micro- biome, and then there's what is now called the epigenome which is a shell of proteins outside the gene, and these proteins actually influence gene activity as well. There's what we call traffic of information between the epigenome, the
Copyright Hyman Digital, LLC 2016 2
microbiome, and the human genome through various metabolites, and are pro- duced primarily by the microbiome in our gastrointestinal tract. So the microbi- ome actually is the first thing that food comes into contact with. The microbi- ome being the ecology of the Earth, literally, it doesn't like antibiotics. It doesn't like hormones. It doesn't like insecticides or pesticides or petroleum products which go in the making of insecticides.
It doesn't like anything artificial. It doesn't like anything that's re- fined, manufactured, processed, GMO because again, GMO interferes with its ecology. It is the life of the Earth, and when it gets inflamed, it sends out me- tabolites that cause disruption of the activity both of the epigenome and of the gene directly. In addition, your genome, your epigenome, which is a group of proteins primarily what are called histones, they react to everything from sleep to emotions to stress to exercise to movement to breathing to food, of course.
So this is the integrated activity which we call the super gene. To Ayurveda, Ayurveda has always said food that comes directly from nature is the best food, and that food has six tastes: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, pungent, and astringent. The combination of sweet, sour, and salt, it slows down your metabolism. Bit- ter, pungent, astringent speeds up your metabolism. Astringent, bitter, sweet is anti-inflammatory, but sweet doesn't mean refined sugar. Sweet means anything that even has a sweet aftertaste. Complex carbohydrates and fats are considered sweet. I read that they use fats like ghee, fats derived from plant products, nuts and avocados. These fats, and ghee of course, which is very concentrated fat, derived from milk, but if that fat is used in the absence of refined sugar, it's what is called lipophilic. It helps the membrane of the cells absorb other micro- nutrients. So fat is good as long as you're not having refined sugar. If you're having refined sugar with the fat, it's devastating.
Of course it's connected to every other activity. If you don't have good sleep, you mess up hormones called leptin and ghrelin which not only al- ter metabolism but change the way you perceive satisfaction from food, what is called the satiety factor, which then builds up the abdominal fat, your belly fat which then becomes an endocrine organ by itself because it's all just steroid me- tabolism. So how we live our life, how we manage stress, how we relate to other people through love or compassion or joy or equanimity, these things in- fluence everything that's happening in our metabolism.
Yes. Actually we started the first study down here at the Chopra Center was just a meditation. Within four and a half days we found that the es- sential armories which regulate the length of telomeres or chromosomes, it went up 40%, but just in 4 days. This study was in collaboration with Elizabeth Blackburn and her team Nobel laureates, but we had saved the blood, so we sent it to our friends at Harvard, Rudy. Also at Mount Sinai, Eric Schadt. What they found was that all the genes that are involved in the healing or self-regula- tion, or what you and I would call homeostasis, they were up-regulated. Their activity went up, and all the genes that were involved in excessive or inappro- priate inflammation, which is a factor in everything from infections to autoim- mune illnesses to inflammatory bowel disease to many types of cancer, those genes went down. In fact, we now have a genetic signature for just meditation.
Now we're doing another study which involves breathing tech- niques, especially those that involve the vagus nerve. As you know the vagus goes from the midbrain to the lungs to the heart to the abdominal organs. We are finding that even simple breathing techniques like ujjayi breathing, or when you raise your hands up like this and inhale or cat cow in yoga, they stimulate the vagus nerve which changes the microbiome which actually shoots up oxyto- cin, dopamine, opiates, serotonin, back to the brain. The vagus not only regu- lates your heart rate availability, which is a measure of stress, but actually helps you breathe slower, stimulates the parasympathetic nervous system, changes the
Copyright Hyman Digital, LLC 2016 4
microbiome, changes inflammatory markers, changes leaky gut, changes the way the brain works. It’s amazed that we never knew all this, that yoga did this, but people feel good after yoga, right?
Yeah, the bacterial genes are listening to your thoughts. What we're also finding is the combination of food and something that you believe in, detox. So if you give people high fiber, if you do a mild cleanse, if give them vegetables that are high in fiber like cabbage or radish or celery, combined with some of these Ayurvedic herbs which are , that then serves as a combination of what we are calling prebiotic, probiotic, and symbiotic. So prebiotic is the high fiber that your bacteria, microbiome, they munch it up because they like it.
It's their food. Now you add to it this Ayurvedic stuff and you
have something which is pretty devastating combination for well-being.
In combination with no sugar and high fiber, and all these prebi- otic foods, it becomes actually something that facilitates the transport of micro- nutrients and also become something that is part of the detox. Our new study which is called SBTI Initiative again with Harvard, UCSF, UCSD, Duke, and Scripps, and our own institution. We are looking at Panchakarma. We're calling it SBTI, Self-directed Biological Transformation Initiative. And where we're looking at the effect of Panchakarma, the food, the detox, but also sleep, yoga, pranam, movement, and healthy motions all combined.
We know that type 2 diabetes is curable, reversible, if you help people achieve ideal body weight. What I didn't know was that when you have
Copyright Hyman Digital, LLC 2016 5
something called leaky gut, for example, which happens when people are stressed, the enzymes in the gut, thanks to an inflamed microbiome, leak into the circulation. They can eat up some of your islet cells, so you can even get type 1 diabetes from leaky gut. We did a study here, a preliminary study where people kept a gratitude journal every night and leaky gut went down and in- flammatory markers went down. All this is implications for heart disease, dia- betes, not only type 2 but type 1.
Yeah, high fat, but low glycemic food at the same time.
Let's define spirituality. Spirituality has been in stages of growth and development. The beginning I think you can justify spirituality as self- awareness; an awareness of body; an awareness of mental space, which is thoughts, feelings, emotions; awareness of relationship; and awareness of what's happening inside you which is some of the techniques pratyahara in yoga, and all those things. This is the wheel of awareness that the Buddha de- scribed. There's awareness, and then there's all the things we can be aware of. First are the five senses: sound, touch, sight, taste, and smell. The second is body, muscular, skeletal system which you can develop awareness of viscera which is called introspection. You can develop awareness of mental space and then you can develop awareness of relationship.
All of these things facilitate self-regulation and healing biologically, there's no question about that. That's what we're looking for.
And there are other aspects to spirituality. Intuition, creativity, insight, our con- sciousness, state of consciousness that takes you beyond waking, dreaming, sleeping, intuition, what is called cosmic consciousness, transcendental con- sciousness, unity consciousness, divine consciousness. Each of these states has its own biology, has its own biological expression. So as we move into what I call nonlocal sense of awareness, your body actually starts to change physically. You'll experience it more as lighter body, you experience it more as energy, lightness of being, and that has biological counterparts. Now, not many people have studied this. We are beginning to study. We're looking at brainwaves, heart rate viability, and the correlation with breath. It's very interesting that when your breath slows down or when it becomes deeper or more regular, eve- rything changes. Brainwaves, heart rate viability changes, gene activity changes, self-regulation gets amplified.
Yes, yes. One thing which we are beginning to see is that your parasympathetic nervous system, your breathing, and your thoughts mirror each other. So you can use any one of those whether it's breathing or influencing the parasympathetic nervous system through yoga practices or just calming the mind through meditation. They all synchronize everything else that's happen- ing.
That's right. We saw it in four days.
I don't take anything that's refined, manufactured, or processed, has chemicals, steroids, hormones, antibiotics, or is genetically modified. That's a given. If you do eat meat and poultry or fish, use it sparingly. Try and eat fish; high fatty fishes are good, salmon, etc. Then make sure your food comes farm to table. Look at the food. I frequently tell people just look at the food and ask yourself, "If I eat that, how will I feel," not 20 years from now, but one hour from now. Twenty years from now you can say, "Yeah, that's going to cause
cholesterol plaques," but nobody worries about that. How will I feel one hour from now? Will I feel more energetic, or will I feel lethargic? That you can tell just by looking at food. Take a picture of the food with your iPhone, or what- ever. Look at it and say, "Does this make me feel vital, energetic, and joyful? Does it make me experience lightness of being, or does it give me a slump? You can tell that just by looking at the food.
It's very simple. Secondly, when you eat, eat consciously — what is called mindful eating — because if you're distracted, or if you're upset, or if you're stressed, the same food will be metabolized differently. The neuropep- tides that occur as a result of our state of consciousness can transfer the food into any metabolic pathway in respect to what it contains. If you're making a lot of adrenaline or cortisol because your mind is agitated, and you're distracted while you're eating food, the same food can be shunted into a metabolic path- way that is toxic, that can cause inflammation.
Yeah, you can get the best food to a stressful person, and they'll make poison out of it. On the other hand, if you're enlightened, then it doesn't matter what food.
Yeah, it's consciousness. Because in Ayurveda we recognize that there's a saying, "Food is Brahman." It's consciousness, and so there are foods that will actually cause inflammation not only of the body but also the mind. Body and mind, you can have inflammatory emotions which can cause inflam- mation in the body, and inflammation in the body will cause inflammation in the mind, and food affects that.
I grew up in India in a warrior family, so we were pretty heavy on meat in those days when I was a child. But of course, it wasn't manufactured; it was what was brought to us from the farm. Over the years, though, I've realized that a plant based diet is much healthier. I've gone in the direction of more or less eating less meat and sometimes not meat at all. If I eat protein, usually it comes from plant-based sources. I enjoy avocados, nuts, non-GMO soybean, etc. I enjoy fish occasionally, but I eat one big meal, and usually that's at lunch time and at dinner, I might have a soup or a salad or a soup and a salad, but light, usually around 6:00, before sunset. So when I go to sleep, my body's en- joying sleep instead of metabolizing junk food. Over the years, I've learned also not to stress about it. I can always find yogurt, which I love which has a lot of these probiotics. I frequently drink kombucha tea, and there's an Indian fer- mented drink from carrots called kanji; we make it at home, and it's a very pow- erful probiotic. Kimchi once in a while. So those are the things that have really started making me feel much more energetic.
I occasionally have ghee, but I will swallow olive oil. I will even drink olive oil once in a while.
And olives also, just eating olives.
Yeah, and I love this concept of the super gene. It's not just your genes; it's your bugs' genes, and it's the epigenome which is actually altered by what you're eating. It's just a powerful concept, and it affects your thoughts, your feelings, your gene expression, and it's great. I think you've been such a leader in helping us to think about the mind-body effect, and now you're talking about the other direction which is how you affect your body by the things you're doing in your lifestyle. The body-mind effect, how do you work both ends of that?
When I wrote “Quantum Healing” in 1988, we didn't have evi- dence around this, but now we have validation because we can measure stuff. We can measure metabolites, genomics, transcriptome analysis, RNA sequenc- ing. All of this is relevant to us.
Yes, at a very fundamental level of cell biology and genetics.
The most exciting thing I'm involved in, something that you're in- volved in as well, is a new app called Jayo. If people want to find out about it, it's jayo.com. It curates experts, like yourself. We're actually hosting your detox plan through Jayo
And we hope to actually create a well-being index that's very dy- namic, so at the end of the day, you don't have to do anything. You can basi- cally just keep your phone with you and a couple of trackers, but even if you don't do that, the phone will track everything including sleep, etc. It'll give you a biological index at the end of the day which is very dynamic and predictive of your well-being. I think this is the best contribution we can make to people's well-being. When you combine metrics with technology, and inspiration, and good teachers, and curated content, and you create a virtual community where everyone wants to collectively embark on the journey to well-being, then you can influence well-being, not only individually, but at the level of society.
