Chief Justice Roberts, President Carter, President Clinton, President Bush, President Obama, fellow Americans, and people of the world: Thank you.
We, the citizens of America, are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and to restore its promise for all of our people.
Together, we will determine the course of America and the world for years to come.
We will face challenges. We will confront hardships. But we will get the job done.
Every four years, we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power, and we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout this transition. They have been magnificent.
Today's ceremony, however, has very special meaning. Because today we are not merely transferring power from one administration to another, or from one party to another -- but we are transferring power from Washington, D.C. and giving it back to you, the American People.
Words from the past: Inauguration speech library
For too long, a small group in our nation's Capital has reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost. Washington flourished -- but the people did not share in its wealth. Politicians prospered -- but the jobs left, and the factories closed.
The establishment protected itself, but not the citizens of our country. Their victories have not been your victories; their triumphs have not been your triumphs; and while they celebrated in our nation's capital, there was little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land.
That all changes -- starting right here, and right now, because this moment is your moment: it belongs to you.
It belongs to everyone gathered here today and everyone watching all across America. This is your day. This is your celebration. And this, the United States of America, is your country.
What truly matters is not which party controls our government, but whether our government is controlled by the people. January 20th 2017, will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of this nation again. The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer.
Everyone is listening to you now.
You came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement the likes of which the world has never seen before. At the center of this movement is a crucial conviction: that a nation exists to serve its citizens.
Americans want great schools for their children, safe neighborhoods for their families, and good jobs for themselves. These are the just and reasonable demands of a righteous public.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation; an education system flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of knowledge; and the crime and gangs and drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
This American carnage stops right here and stops right now.
We are one nation -- and their pain is our pain. Their dreams are our dreams; and their success will be our success. We share one heart, one home, and one glorious destiny.
The oath of office I take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans.
For many decades, we've enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry; subsidized the armies of other countries while allowing for the very sad depletion of our military; we've defended other nation's borders while refusing to defend our own; and spent trillions of dollars overseas while America's infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay.
We've made other countries rich while the wealth, strength, and confidence of our country has disappeared over the horizon.
One by one, the factories shuttered and left our shores, with not even a thought about the millions upon millions of American workers left behind.
The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed across the entire world.
But that is the past. And now we are looking only to the future. We assembled here today are issuing a new decree to be heard in every city, in every foreign capital, and in every hall of power.
From this day forward, a new vision will govern our land.
From this moment on, it's going to be America First.
Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families. We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries making our products, stealing our companies, and destroying our jobs. Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength.
I will fight for you with every breath in my body -- and I will never, ever let you down.
America will start winning again, winning like never before.
We will bring back our jobs. We will bring back our borders. We will bring back our wealth. And we will bring back our dreams.
We will build new roads, and highways, and bridges, and airports, and tunnels, and railways all across our wonderful nation.
We will get our people off of welfare and back to work -- rebuilding our country with American hands and American labor.
We will follow two simple rules: Buy American and hire American.
We will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world -- but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.
We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone, but rather to let it shine as an example for everyone to follow.
We will reinforce old alliances and form new ones -- and unite the civilized world against radical Islamic terrorism, which we will eradicate completely from the face of the Earth.
At the bedrock of our politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America, and through our loyalty to our country, we will rediscover our loyalty to each other.
When you open your heart to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice. The Bible tells us, "How good and pleasant it is when God's people live together in unity."
We must speak our minds openly, debate our disagreements honestly, but always pursue solidarity.
When America is united, America is totally unstoppable.
There should be no fear -- we are protected, and we will always be protected.
We will be protected by the great men and women of our military and law enforcement and, most importantly, we are protected by God.
Finally, we must think big and dream even bigger.
In America, we understand that a nation is only living as long as it is striving.
We will no longer accept politicians who are all talk and no action -- constantly complaining but never doing anything about it.
The time for empty talk is over. Now arrives the hour of action.
Do not let anyone tell you it cannot be done. No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America.
We will not fail. Our country will thrive and prosper again.
We stand at the birth of a new millennium, ready to unlock the mysteries of space, to free the Earth from the miseries of disease, and to harness the energies, industries and technologies of tomorrow.
A new national pride will stir our souls, lift our sights, and heal our divisions.
It is time to remember that old wisdom our soldiers will never forget: that whether we are black or brown or white, we all bleed the same red blood of patriots, we all enjoy the same glorious freedoms, and we all salute the same great American Flag.
And whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the windswept plains of Nebraska, they look up at the same night sky, they fill their heart with the same dreams, and they are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty Creator.
So to all Americans, in every city near and far, small and large, from mountain to mountain, and from ocean to ocean, hear these words:
You will never be ignored again.
Your voice, your hopes, and your dreams will define our American destiny. And your courage and goodness and love will forever guide us along the way.
Together, We will make America strong again.
We will make wealthy again.
We will make America proud again.
We will make America safe again.
And yes, together, we will make America great again. Thank you. God bless you. And God bless America.
Thank you so much.  That's so nice.  Isn't he a great guy.  He doesn't get a fair press; he doesn't get it.  It's just not fair.  And I have to tell you I'm here, and very strongly here, because I have great respect for Steve King and have great respect likewise for Citizens United, David and everybody, and tremendous resect for the Tea Party.  Also, also the people of Iowa.  They have something in common.  Hard-working people.  They want to work, they want to make the country great.  I love the people of Iowa.  So that's the way it is.  Very simple.
With that said, our country is really headed in the wrong direction with a president who is doing an absolutely terrible job.  The world is collapsing around us, and many of the problems we've caused.  Our president is either grossly incompetent, a word that more and more people are using, and I think I was the first to use it, or he has a completely different agenda than you want to know about, which could be possible.  In any event, Washington is broken, and our country is in serious trouble and total disarray.  Very simple.  Politicians are all talk, no action.  They are all talk and no action.  And it's constant; it never ends.
And I'm a conservative, actually very conservative, and I'm a Republican.  And I'm very disappointed by our Republican politicians.  Because they let the president get away with absolute murder.  You see always, oh we're going to do this, we're going to--.  Nothing ever happens; nothing ever happens.
You look at Obamacare.  A total catastrophe and by the way it really kicks in in '16 and it is going to be a disaster.  People are closing up shops.  Doctors are quitting the business.  I have a friend of mine who's a doctor, a very good doctor, a very successful guy.  He said, I have more accountants than I have patients.  And he needs because it is so complicated and so terrible and he's never had that before and he's going to close up his business.  And he was very successful guy.  But it's happening more and more.
Look at Obamacare with a $5 billion website.  I have many websites, many, many websites.  They're all over the place.  But for $10, okay?
Now everything about Obamacare was a lie.  It was a filthy lie.  And when you think about it, lies, I mean are they prosecuted?  Does anyone do anything?  And what are the Republican politicians doing about it?  He lied about the doctor, he lied about every aspect.  You can keep your plan.  And you've all heard that hundreds of times.  That's like the real estate location, location.  I don't even say it anymore because everybody goes location, location.  But you have heard this about Obamacare.
And it's disgraceful.  It's a big, fat, horrible lie.  Your deductibles are going through the roof.  You're not going to get--unless you're hit by an army tank, you're not going to get coverage.  And people that had plans that they loved, that they really loved, don't have those plans anymore.  So it's a real, real disaster.  And somebody has to repeal and replace Obamacare.  And they have to do it fast and not just talk about it.
Now, we have to build a fence.  And it's got to be a beauty.  Who can build better than Trump?  I build; it's what I do.  I build; I build nice fences, but I build great buildings.  Fences are easy, believe me.  I saw the other day on television people just walking across the border.  They're walking.  The military is standing there holding guns and people are just walking right in front, coming into our country.  It is so terrible.  It is so unfair.  It is so incompetent.  And we don't have the best coming in.  We have people that are criminals, we have people that are crooks.  You can certainly have terrorists.  You can certainly have Islamic terrorists.  You can have anything coming across the border.  We don't do anything about it.  So I would say that if I run and if I win, I would certainly start by building a very, very powerful border.

Again, the politicians talk about it and they do nothing about it.  Benghazi.  Oh, Benghazi, Benghazi.  Everything is Benghazi.  What happens?  Nothing.
IRS, e-mails.  I get sued all the time, okay.  I run a big business.  You know I've always said it's very, very hard for a person who is very successful.  I have done so many deals.  Almost all of them have been tremendously successful.  You'll see that when I file my statements.  I mean you will see; you will be very proud of me, okay.  But I've always said, and I said it strongly, it's very hard for somebody that does tremendous numbers of deals to run for politics, run for political office, any office, let alone president.  Because you've done so much; you've beaten so many people; you've created so many--  Look, Obama, what did he do?  No deal.  He never did a deal.  He did one deal.  A house.  And if you did that house you'd be in jail right now, okay.  He got away with murder.  But I can tell you, e-mails.  IRS, the e-mails, thousands of them, they were lost; they were lost.  If you were in my world you would know that e-mails can't be lost; they can't be lost.  So why aren't our politicians finding out where those e-mails are?
They talk about executive orders and they talk about immigration and they talk about oh well we have to stop the border; that's the end of it.  Believe me if I did something you would have a border that would be great.  But they talk about it.  And then you have a president that does an executive order.  Nobody even heard of an executive order.  He does it to let people come in and nobody does anything about executive orders.  Why didn't they go to court and ask for declaratory judgment--which is something that when you know somebody is going to go after you and when it's in writing, and he's been saying it for a long time; he said, I'm going to approve this and that--why didn't our Republicans go in and get a declaratory judgment from the courts because you could have started the process six months earlier.  Instead they have a weak lawsuit, that probably the time it's finished, I know so much about this, six, seven, eight years from now everyone's going to forget about it.  We'll be into a different mode, and our country will be further destroyed.  So we have to do something.
Jobs.  China.  I mean I've made so much money fighting against the Chinese.  One of the best deals I ever did was against the Chinese, and they respect me for it.  And I know them.  And they say, we can't believe what we're getting away with.  We can't believe how stupid your leaders are.  They tell me that.  Now they don't know I'm going to go and make a speech about it, but why not.  But they tell me that.
And by the way, especially for the folks here that sell so much--goods, I mean the goods you sell are incredible; I don't know if you've been watching what's happening with the devaluations of so many countries.  The Euro, China is going crazy with the devaluation.  I never thought that they'd have the guts to do what they're doing.  They are devaluing down to nothing.  And what it's going to do is make it impossible for you to sell your product; it's going make it impossible for you to compete.  And they're getting away with it.  And they wouldn't have even done it two years ago, but now they feel we're so weak and we have so many different problems all over the world that they can do it.  But you watch this devaluation of all of it.  I mean the Euro, China, Mexico; everybody is devaluing.  And when you hear the dollar is getting stronger, it sounds good.  You know it's one of those things, sounds good.  Be very careful.  Be very careful.  Because we're just going to lose more and more business to these foreign countries that really know what they are doing.  They have it set.  Don't forget another thing.  China became the number one economic power a year ago.  That was unthinkable; to think that that was going to happen.  It was absolutely unthinkable.  So it happened and it's very, very sad.
Now we spent $2 trillion in Iraq.  We got nothing.  They don't even respect us; they don't even care about us.  Until they started getting their ass kicked, and call, oh please come back and help us.  We want you out; then all of the sudden a new group forms, ISIS.  By the way, you know how they formed.  They took the oil.  And for those of you that know and love Donald Trump--there are some of you--have I been saying for four years, keep the oil.  So now ISIS has the oil.  And the stuff that ISIS doesn't have, Iran is going to take.  So we get nothing.  We have $2 trillion and we have thousands of lives lost, thousands, and we have, what do we have.  I mean I walk down the streets of New York and I see so many wounded warriors, incredible people.  And we have to help those people, we have to help our vets, we have to help our military, we have to build our military.  But, and we have to do it fast; we have to do it fast.  We have incompetent people.  They put people in charge that have no clue what they're doing.  It needs money.
We have to make our country rich again so we do that, so we can save Social Security.  'Cause I'm not a cutter; I'll probably be the only Republican that does not want to cut Social Security.  I'm not a cutter of Social Security; I want to make the country rich so that Social Security can be afforded, and Medicare and Medicaid.  Get rid of the waste, get rid of the fraud, but you deserve your Social Security; you've been paying your Security.  And like, I like Congressman Ryan, I like a lot of the people that are talking about you know cutting Social Security, and by the way the Democrats are eating your lunch on this issue.  It's an issue that you're not going to win; you've got to make the country rich again and strong again so that you can afford it, and so you can afford military, and all of the other things.
Now, we have a game changer now, and the game changer is nuclear weapons.  We really do have to get strong, and we have to get strong fast.  We can't let Iran get a nuclear weapon.  We can't do it.  Can't do it.  We cannot let that happen.  You know in the old days, I would have said 100 years ago, 50 years ago, 30 years ago, pull out and let them fight each other.
Here we are in Syria.  We're fighting people that want to overturn Syria.  Think of this.  We're fighting ISIS, but ISIS wants to overturn the government.  Maybe you let them fight for a little while and then you take out the one that remains, okay.  But think of it; think of it.  ISIS is fighting them and we are bombing the hell out of them, but we want Syria to fall.  There are so many things; there are so many things.
But the one game changer that we have to be careful with, that we never really had to think about  too much before, other than a cetain number of years ago, is the nuclear.  Nuclear today, it's not like soldiers in uniforms shooting rifles.  You can take out the East Coast of this country, you can take out large sections of the Midwest, you can take out things that were unthinkable.  The power.  And we have to be in a position where that never, ever, ever, every happens.  We've never had this before.
We have a situation in Afghanistan; we're spending tremendous amounts of money there.  We're trying to do the right thing.  We have leadership, again--no leadership respects us.  You know, leadership of other places never respect stupid people, okay, that's one thing you're going to find.  The same thing is happening there.  And I never knew that Afghanistan until a year ago or so, Afghanistan has tremendous wealth in minerals, different, not the oil, but minerals.  And we're fighting here, and on the other side of the mountain China is taking out all the minerals.  They're taking it out.  Trillion of dollars and millions of dollars of minerals.  So we're fighting here and they are taking it out, looking at us and saying thank you very much sucker.  It's really, really crazy.

So we have to rebuild quickly our infrastructure of this country.  If we don't--  The other day in Ohio a bridge collapsed.  Bridges are collapsing all over the country.  The reports on bridges and the like are unbelievable, what's happening with our infrastructure.
I go to Saudi Arabia, I go to Dubai; I am doing big jobs in Dubai.  I go to various different places.  I go to China.  They are building a bridge on every corner.  They have bridges that make the George Washington Bridge like small time stuff.  They're building the most incredible things you have ever seen.  They are building airports in Qatar--which they like to say "cutter" but I've always said "qatar" so I'll keep it "qatar" what the hell.  But they're building, they're building an airport and have just completed an airport the likes of which you have never seen, in Dubai an airport the likes of which you have never seen.  And then I come back to LaGuardia where the runways have potholes.  The place is falling apart.  You go into the main terminal and they have a terraza floor that's so old it's falling apart.  And they have a hole in it, and they replace it with asphalt.  So you have a white terraza floor and they put asphalt all over the place.  This is inside, not outside.  And I just left Dubai where they have the most incredible thing you've ever seen.  In fact my pilot said oh Mr. Trump this is such an honor.  I said it's not an honor; they're just smart.  But you look at LAX, and you look at Kennedy Airport, and you look at our airports generally, you look at our roadways where they're crumbling.
You look at all of the things that are bad--  I'll give you an example. And this isn't part of what I was going to say, but I ride down the highways and somebody makes those guard rails.  You know the guard rails.  The ones that sort of go like this [demonstrates with hand] that are always  bent, rusted and horrible.  Did you ever see more than like 20 feet which isn't corroded, or bent or the heat, if it gets too hot, it just crushes.  Now they've been selling this thing for 25 years.  Why doesn't someone stop them and get something that works.  Because they don't know; they don't know what's happening.  Somebody made a lot of money on that.  They don't know what is happening.
So we have to make our country great again.  We have to rebuild our country.  And we have a long way to go.  We are just in such serious trouble because we owe so much money.  Now we owe it to the Chinese, a lot of it.  We owe it to other countries.  They're the ones that hold the debt.  And then we give them money.  We have countries that we owe money to and yet we're giving them subsidies.  I just ordered thousands of television sets and between LG and Samsung and I mean you know--  No American company comes to see and comes to bid.  It's South Korea, and whenever they have a problem we send the battleships, we send the destroyers, we send our airplanes, we're going to protect them.  What are we doing; why aren't they paying us?  Why aren't they paying us; what are we doing?  I order thousands and thousands of sets all the time, for some reason it's South Korea.  You know whether it's China, South Korea, but in this case televisions, South Korea.  Why aren't they doing something to justify what is going on?
Now, we have a very important election coming up.  We have a presidential election coming up. And we have some good people.  Nobody like Trump of course, but these are minor details.  We have some good people.
It' can't be Mitt because Mitt ran and failed.  He failed.  I mean I liked him.  Look--like him, dislike him--the 47% statement that he made, that's not going away.  The Romneycare from Massachusetts, that's not going away.  What do you think they're going to say oh we won't bring that up this time.  It's not fair because it was a long t--  That doesn't work.  But more importantly, he choked.  Something happened to him in the last month.  He had that election won.  And let me tell you something.  That election, sort of like a dealmaker that can't close the deal.  I know many of those guys; they get it up to the one-yard line, they go ah, ah I can't close it.  Or a golfer that can't sink the three-footer to win the tournament.  And there are many of them.  Most people are like that; I mean most people are like that.  You can't give somebody another chance, 'cause actually I think this election is tougher to win than beating a failed president.  I really do.  I think beating Obama would have been a much easier one than the one that's coming up, which is sad to say but true.  So you can't have Romney.  He choked.
You can't have Bush.  The last thing we need is another Bush.  Now I made that statement very strongly, and now every one says the last thing--  You know they copied it.  I'll be accused of copying the statement; that's the bad thing.  But I said it.  I was the one that said it first, and I mean it.  The last thing we need is another Bush.  Now, he's totally in favor of Common Core; that's a disaster, that's bad, it should be local and all of that.  But he's totally in favor of Common Core.  He's very, very weak on immigration.  Don't forget--remember his statement--they come for love.  I say, what?  Come for love?  You've got these people coming, half of them are criminals.  They're coming for love?  They're coming for a lot of other reasons, and it's not love.  And when he runs, you got to remember his brother really gave us Obama.  I was never a big fan, but his brother gave us Obama.  'Cause Abraham Lincoln coming home back from the dead could not have won the election because it was going so badly and the economy was just absolutely in shambles that last couple of months.  And then he appointed Justice Roberts.  And Jeb wanted Justice Roberts.  And Justice Roberts basically approved Obamacare in a shocking decision that nobody believes.  So you can't have Jeb Bush.  And he's going to lose aside from that; he's not going to win.  So Mitt and--you just can't have those two.  That's it.  That's it.  It's so simple.
So just in summing up and I just wrote a few of these little points down because it's very important.  And I watch these teleprompters, and by the way I think any president candidate that runs should not be allowed to use a teleprompter, because we got one that uses teleprompters.  And people say, oh he is so quick on his feet.  He is reading it.  I mean give me a break.  Everything is read.  You don't really test the mettle of a man or a woman unless they can get up on stage and talk.  And that's what we ended up getting--the king of teleprompters.  But, so when I look at these things here I say you know what, it's so much easier, it would be so nice, just bah, pa, bah, pa, bah, bing, bing, bing.  No problems, get off stage, everybody falls asleep and that's the end of that.  But we have to do something about these teleprompters.
But in looking at these situations--  I built an incredible company.  And you'll see that.  An incredible company; a wonderful company.  I employ thousands of people and I love doing what I'm doing.  And in a certain way, I wish I weren't doing this, but our country is in such trouble and would be so easy to fix.  We have such great potential.
So if I run for president and if I win, I would totally succeed in:
creating jobs;
defeating ISIS and stopping the Islamic terrorists--and you have to do that;
reducing the budget deficit--so important, have to do it;
securing our Southern border--and I mean seriously securing it;
stopping nuclear weapons in Iran and elsewhere;
saving Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, without cutting it down to the bone because it's not fair to people that have been paying for their whole lives and other people and it's not fair to future people coming up, and we can do it;
repealing Obamacare and replacing it with something far better for the people, and far less expensive, both for the people and for the country.  And believe me there are plans that are so much better for everybody.  And everybody can be covered.  I'm not saying leave 50-percent of the people out.  Everybody can be c-- This plan is just a basic disaster.  Nobody knows.  As bad as the website was, this is how bad the plan itself is;
fixing our country's infrastructure, our bridges, our schools, our highways, our airports.  And that, I can tell you, nobody is close to Trump.  I just got the best hotel in North America.  I'm building, which is sort of interesting, think of this one.  I'm building one of the great hotels of the world on Pennsylvania Avenue, right opposite the White House, between the White House and Congress.  Right on Penn.--  The  Old Post Office site, and I got it from Obama.  Do you believe that?  And everybody wanted it.  So, I can't believe it myself.  But it's going to be fantastic;
and so many other things.
I know what needs to be done to make America great again.  We can make this country great again.  The potential is enormous.  And I am serious thinking of running for president because I can do the job.
Thank you all very much.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you.  Beautiful.  Thank you.
Thank you very much, everybody. Well, I want to begin by thanking the people of South Carolina. This is a special state. Thank you. These are special people and we got a little boost last week from a place we all remember -- New Hampshire. We can't forget it. Special, special. We love it. And they sent us in here with a very good feeling, right?
Very good feeling. So I really want to thank you and my volunteers. All of these people -- volunteers and they travel and they -- and I say, "what are you doing?" And now they're going to Texas and they're going all over. Some are going to Nevada. I'll be going to Nevada. We're making a big speech tomorrow in Atlanta and then we're going right to Nevada.
And I think we're going to do terrific and the SEC's (ph) going to be very, very exciting. We expect to do very, very well. Very well 
I want to just say thank you to my family. It's been not easy for them. They don't see me anymore. I'm making speeches all the time and I have a great. I really have a great family so I just want to thank all of you.

And Ivanka -- you know we have a hospital ready just in case. In South Carolina we're going to have a baby. There's nothing wrong with that, right? So ..

Could be -- it could be any second. It could even be before I'm finished but it's -- but she insisted on being here. It was so important to Ivanka to insist on being here so thank you. Really good and Jared, Vanessa, Don.

We have a wonderful lieutenant governor who backed us very early in the process.

You know Henry, right? The lieutenant governor of South Carolina. I will take him over the governor anytime because we won. We won 

He handle that very nicely. He's tough. He's very tough. Tiffany, Eric, Lara and Melania. Melania, say something. Go ahead, please 

Just want to say an amazing place -- South Carolina. Congratulation to my husband. He was working very hard and he loves you. We love you and we're going ahead to Nevada. And we will see what happen (sic). He would be the best president 

And representing some very, very wonderful children, Ivanka. Just say a few words.


Thank you very much. Thank you very much. So I was watching upstairs and it was really amazing to be watching what I was watching. And some of the pundits and overall fair but not too much. But a number of the pundits said, "well, if a couple of the other candidates dropped out if you add their scores together it's going to equal Trump."

But these geniuses -- they're geniuses -- they don't understand that as people drop out I'm going to get a lot of those votes also. You don't just 

You don't just add them together. So I think we're going to do very, very well. I think we're going to do very well. I want to also congratulate the other candidates. In particular I have to say Ted and Marco did a really good job and they got -- they did quite well as I understand. No, come on. Just one minute. Come on. One second, right? Good.

OK. We go back to war tomorrow morning. Tomorrow morning we'll be back but I just want to congratulate the other candidates. There's nothing easy about running for president, I can tell you. It's tough, it's nasty, it's mean, it's vicious, it's beautiful.

When you win it's beautiful and we're going to start -- we are going to start winning for our country. We're going to start winning.

Because our country doesn't win anymore. Doesn't win. We don't win with the military, we can't beat ISIS. We have great military but we can't beat ISIS. We don't win on trade. You look at what China's doing to us, what Japan does to us, what Mexico is just killing us at the border -- at the border and with trade. Mexico is killing us -- absolutely. We'll do the wall. Don't worry. We're going to do the wall.

We're going to do the wall and by the way, who's going to pay for the wall?

Mexico's going to pay for the wall and it's very easy. The other politicians come down, "you can't get Mexico to pay for the wall." I said, "100 percent." We have a $58 billion trade deficit with Mexico. The wall is going to cost $10 to $12 billion, OK? Believe me, they will pay. One of the officials -- actually, one of the ex-officials from Mexico had a news conference.

And he announced that we will not be paying for the wall. Who does Mr. Trump think he is? They came to me -- the press. These people -- look at all those cameras back there.
The press came to me and they told me that he said that he would not pay for the wall. Do you have a comment? I said, "yes. The wall just got 10 feet taller."

It's true. And I love Mexico. I love Mexico, I love China, I love many of these countries that rip us off because we have leaders that are incomptent and don't know what they're doing. I love these countries. They're great. I have thousands and thousands of Hispanics. We're going to Nevada.

I lead -- I lead with the Hispanics. I'm leading in every poll with the Hispanics. They love me, I love them. The problem is -- the problem is that the leaders of these countries whether it's Mexico or Japan or Viet Nam which is just doing a big number now all of a sudden or China in particular -- that's the big one. The greatest abuse of a country that I think I've ever seen financially -- China.


What they've done to us is the greatest single theft in the history of the world. They've taken our jobs, they've taken our money, they've taken everything. We're bringing our jobs back, folks. We're bringing our jobs back. We're going to bring them back 

And I know how to do it. We've had so many -- we've had so many incredible endorsements and to me getting the greatest business people to endorse me is very important. Carl Icahn endorsed me, so many others have endorsed me.

And we're going to put these great business people in charge of trade and when China wants to come and negotiate, they're going to negotiate not with a political hack which is what they have now. They're going to negotiate with the best business minds in the world and we have them in this country.

So we're going to do a lot of beautiful work. We're going to terminate Obamacare. It's going to terminated. It's going to be over 

It's going to be repealed and it's going to be replaced. And you're going to have much better health care at a much smaller cost because Obamacare -- if you look -- look at the increases in your Obamacare. Twenty-five, 35, 45, even 55 percent. It's dead. It's not working. We're going to go to a plan that's going to be so much better and so much less expensive.

So second amendment by the way -- this is a room loves the second amendment. Thank you, fellows. This is a room loves and cherishes the second amendment. We are going to protect our second amendment. Totally 

Common core is gone. We are getting rid of common core. We're brining education to a local level. The people in this community -- every time I see them they want education locally. The parents, the teachers. They want to do it -- they don't want bureaucrats in Washington telling them how to educate their children.

We spend as a nation more for education per pupil than any other nation in the world. Not even close. More per pupil -- second place doesn't even exist it's so different. And yet out of 30 countries we're ranked number 30. You have China, you have Norway, Swenden, Denmark and then you have number 30, the United States. So we spend the most and we're at the bottom of the heap. It's not going to happen anymore, folks. It's not going to happen anymore.

We are going to build our military which I thank because a number of the people came down and a number of the pundits in Washington I -- we love our military.

We love our military. And by the way we love our police. Our police are terrific. We love our police 

They are not being treated properly. We're going to build our military so big, so good, so strong, so powerful that nobody is ever going to mess with us, folks.

And we're going to buy -- we're going to buy the equipment that our generals, our soldiers, that everybody that's in the know want. We're not buying equipment that sells because they have political pull (ph). Because they take campaign and they give campaign contributions.

We are going to get the equipment that they want, not the equipment that they're told to have by senators and congressmen in Washington. We're going to have great equipment.

And the reason I can say that is I'm self-funding my campaign. I'm not getting millions of dollars from all of these

I'm not getting millions of dollars from all of these special interests and lobbyists and donors that once they get it they literally do whatever the politicians want. That's not going to happen. And we're going to take care of our vets. We love our vets and they're being treated terribly. We're taking care of our vets.

So we're now off to Nevada and it's a great state. We have great people. We have great people in our nation. No matter where we go -- I went to Mobile, Alabama -- 35,000 people. We went to Oklahoma recently twice -- 20,000 people, 20,000 people. No matter where we go we fill up the arenas.

Over here the other day we had a 9,000 -- we had a 10,000 -- we have people. The only thing that stops the crowds are the walls because we can't get them in. We have to send thousands of people away.

Time Magazine -- Time Magazine last year did an incredible cover story. They said "it's a movement." And that's what it is. It's an incredible movement with incredible people. Incredible people.

It's an incredible movement with incredible people. I tell you. And whether we go -- honestly whether we go to Dallas or whether we go anywhere you say -- you go to L.A. -- you go anywhere you say. Our people are incredible. And our theme -- what's our theme? You know it, right?

Our theme which I love may be the greatest theme of all time, right? And the word again eventually is going to come off. We're going to get rid of the whole theme because what's going to happen -- make America great again, right?

 And the last two weeks because I've gotten to see so many -- I guess millions when you add them all up with all of these rooms and all of these speeches. And I've met so many people. But the people are so incredible that I've been saying make America great again and it's going to be greater than ever before. That's the kind of potential we have. Greater then every before.

 So I want to thank everybody. I love you all. Again, South Carolina we will never forget you. We will never forget you. We will never, ever forget South Carolina. We will never forget our great volunteers. We love our volunteers. We'll never forget all of the people that have helped us so much. My family and folks, let's go.

 Let's have a big win in Nevada. Let's have a big win at SEC (ph). Let's put this thing away and let's make America great again. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.

 Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you, and thank you to the Center for National Interest for honoring me with this invitation. It truly is a great honor. I’d like to talk today about how to develop a new foreign policy direction for our country, one that replaces randomness with purpose, ideology with strategy, and chaos with peace.

 It’s time to shake the rust off America’s foreign policy. It’s time to invite new voices and new visions into the fold, something we have to do. The direction I will outline today will also return us to a timeless principle. My foreign policy will always put the interests of the American people and American security above all else. It has to be first. Has to be.

 That will be the foundation of every single decision that I will make.

 America First will be the major and overriding theme of my administration. But to chart our path forward, we must first briefly take a look back. We have a lot to be proud of.

 In the 1940s we saved the world. The greatest generation beat back the Nazis and Japanese imperialists. Then we saved the world again. This time, from totalitarianism and communism. The Cold War lasted for decades but, guess what, we won and we won big. Democrats and Republicans working together got Mr. Gorbachev to heed the words of President Reagan, our great president, when he said, tear down this wall.

 History will not forget what he did. A very special man and president. Unfortunately, after the Cold War our foreign policy veered badly off course. We failed to develop a new vision for a new time. In fact, as time went on, our foreign policy began to make less and less sense. Logic was replaced with foolishness and arrogance, which led to one foreign policy disaster after another.

 They just kept coming and coming. We went from mistakes in Iraq to Egypt to Libya, to President Obama’s line in the sand in Syria. Each of these actions have helped to throw the region into chaos and gave ISIS the space it needs to grow and prosper. Very bad. It all began with a dangerous idea that we could make western democracies out of countries that had no experience or interests in becoming a western democracy.

 We tore up what institutions they had and then were surprised at what we unleashed. Civil war, religious fanaticism, thousands of Americans and just killed be lives, lives, lives wasted. Horribly wasted. Many trillions of dollars were lost as a result. The vacuum was created that ISIS would fill. Iran, too, would rush in and fill that void much to their really unjust enrichment.

 They have benefited so much, so sadly, for us. Our foreign policy is a complete and total disaster. No vision. No purpose. No direction. No strategy. Today I want to identify five main weaknesses in our foreign policy.

 First, our resources are totally over extended. President Obama has weakened our military by weakening our economy. He’s crippled us with wasteful spending, massive debt, low growth, a huge trade deficit and open borders. Our manufacturing trade deficit with the world is now approaching $1 trillion a year.

 We’re rebuilding other countries while weakening our own. Ending the theft of American jobs will give us resources we need to rebuild our military, which has to happen and regain our financial independence and strength. I am the only person running for the presidency who understands this and this is a serious problem.

 I’m the only one — believe me, I know them all, I’m the only one who knows how to fix it.

 Secondly, our allies are not paying their fair share, and I’ve been talking about this recently a lot. Our allies must contribute toward their financial, political, and human costs, have to do it, of our tremendous security burden. But many of them are simply not doing so.

 They look at the United States as weak and forgiving and feel no obligation to honor their agreements with us. In NATO, for instance, only 4 of 28 other member countries besides America, are spending the minimum required 2 percent of GDP on defense. We have spent trillions of dollars over time on planes, missiles, ships, equipment, building up our military to provide a strong defense for Europe and Asia.

 The countries we are defending must pay for the cost of this defense, and if not, the U.S. must be prepared to let these countries defend themselves. We have no choice.

 The whole world will be safer if our allies do their part to support our common defense and security. A Trump administration will lead a free world that is properly armed and funded, and funded beautifully.

 Thirdly, our friends are beginning to think they can’t depend on us. We’ve had a president who dislikes our friends and bows to our enemies, something that we’ve never seen before in the history of our country. He negotiated a disastrous deal with Iran, and then we watched them ignore its terms even before the ink was dry. Iran cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon, cannot be allowed. Remember that, cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.

 And under a Trump administration, will never, ever be allowed to have that nuclear weapon.

 All of this without even mentioning the humiliation of the United States with Iran’s treatment of our ten captured sailors — so vividly I remember that day. In negotiation, you must be willing to walk. The Iran deal, like so many of our worst agreements, is the result of not being willing to leave the table.

 When the other side knows you’re not going to walk, it becomes absolutely impossible to win — you just can’t win. At the same time, your friends need to know that you will stick by the agreements that you have with them. You’ve made that agreement, you have to stand by it and the world will be a better place. President Obama gutted our missile defense program and then abandoned our missile defense plans with Poland and the Czech Republic. He supported the ouster of a friendly regime in Egypt that had a longstanding peace treaty with Israel, and then helped bring the Muslim Brotherhood to power in its place.

 Israel, our great friend and the one true democracy in the Middle East has been snubbed and criticized by an administration that lacks moral clarity. Just a few days ago, Vice President Biden again criticized Israel, a force for justice and peace, for acting as an impatient peace area in the region.

 President Obama has not been a friend to Israel. He has treated Iran with tender love and care and made it a great power. Iran has, indeed, become a great, great power in just a very short period of time, because of what we’ve done. All of the expense and all at the expense of Israel, our allies in the region and very importantly, the United States itself.

 We’ve picked fights with our oldest friends, and now they’re starting to look elsewhere for help. Remember that. Not good.

 Fourth, our rivals no longer respect us. In fact, they’re just as confused as our allies, but in an even bigger problem is they don’t take us seriously anymore. The truth is they don’t respect us. When President Obama landed in Cuba on Air Force One, no leader was there, nobody, to greet him.

 Perhaps an incident without precedent in the long and prestigious history of Air Force One. Then amazingly, the same thing happened in Saudi Arabia. It’s called no respect. Absolutely no respect.

 Do you remember when the president made a long and expensive trip to Copenhagen, Denmark, to get the Olympics for our country, and after this unprecedented effort, it was announced that the United States came in fourth — fourth place? The president of the United States making this trip — unprecedented — comes in fourth place. He should have known the result before making such an embarrassing commitment. We were laughed at all over the world, as we have been many, many times.

 The list of humiliations go on and on and on. President Obama watches helplessly as North Korea increases its aggression and expands further and further with its nuclear reach. Our president has allowed China to continue its economic assault on American jobs and wealth, refusing to enforce trade deals and apply leverage on China necessary to rein in North Korea. We have the leverage. We have the power over China, economic power, and people don’t understand it. And with that economic power, we can rein in and we can get them to do what they have to do with North Korea, which is totally out of control.

 He has even allowed China to steal government secrets with cyber attacks and engaged in industrial espionage against the United States and its companies. We’ve let our rivals and challengers think they can get away with anything, and they do. They do at will. It always happens. If President Obama’s goal had been to weaken America, he could not have done a better job.

 Finally, America no longer has a clear understanding of our foreign policy goals. Since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, we’ve lacked a coherent foreign policy. One day, we’re bombing Libya and getting rid of a dictator to foster democracy for civilians. The next day, we’re watching the same civilians suffer while that country falls and absolutely falls apart. Lives lost, massive moneys lost. The world is a different place.

 We’re a humanitarian nation, but the legacy of the Obama-Clinton interventions will be weakness, confusion and disarray, a mess. We’ve made the Middle East more unstable and chaotic than ever before. We left Christians subject to intense persecution and even genocide.

 We have done nothing to help the Christians, nothing, and we should always be ashamed for that, for that lack of action. Our actions in Iraq, Libya and Syria have helped unleash ISIS, and we’re in a war against radical Islam, but President Obama won’t even name the enemy, and unless you name the enemy, you will never ever solve the problem.

 Hillary Clinton also refuses to say the words radical Islam, even as she pushes for a massive increase in refugees coming into our country. After Secretary Clinton’s failed intervention in Libya, Islamic terrorists in Benghazi took down our consulate and killed our ambassador and three brave Americans. Then, instead of taking charge that night, Hillary Clinton decided to go home and sleep. Incredible.

 Clinton blames it all on a video, an excuse that was a total lie, proven to be absolutely a total lie. Our ambassador was murdered and our secretary of state misled the nation. And, by the way, she was not awake to take that call at 3 o’clock in the morning. And now ISIS is making millions and millions of dollars a week selling Libya oil. And you know what? We don’t blockade, we don’t bomb, we don’t do anything about it. It’s almost as if our country doesn’t even know what’s happening, which could be a fact and could be true. This will all change when I become president.

 To our friends and allies, I say America is going to be strong again. America is going to be reliable again. It’s going to be a great and reliable ally again. It’s going to be a friend again. We’re going to finally have a coherent foreign policy based upon American interests and the shared interests of our allies.

 Thank you Arkansas! #Trump2016 #SuperTuesday
 Thank you Virginia! #Trump2016 #SuperTuesday
 Thank you Alabama! #Trump2016 #SuperTuesday
 Thank you Tennessee! #Trump2016 #SuperTuesday
 Thank you Massachusetts! #Trump2016 #SuperTuesday
 Thank you Georgia! #SuperTuesday #Trump2016
 Wow! Thank you Louisville, Kentucky!  #VoteTrump on 3/5/2016! Lets #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Lets go America! Get out & #VoteTrump! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! #SuperTuesday  http://someotherlink.com/
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Thank you Columbus, Ohio! 
 The people of South Carolina are embarrassed by Nikki Haley!
 Got the endorsement of Brian France and  yesterday in Georgia. Also, many of the sports great drivers. Thank you Nascar and Georgia!
 Thank you Georgia! 15,000 amazing supporters tonight! Everyone get out & #VoteTrump tomorrow! #SuperTuesday 
 Great news- Former Mayor of Dallas, Tom Leppert, has just endorsed me! Thank you! Tomorrow is a big day- VOTE! #VoteTrump #SuperTuesday
 Thank you Brian France, Bill Elliott,   &  #NASCAR #Trump2017 #VoteTrump 
 Phony Rubio commercial. I could have settled, but won't out of principle! See student surveys. 
 Trump University has a 98% approval rating. I could have settled but won't out of principle!
 Thank you Virginia! 15,000 amazing supporters! Everyone get out and #VoteTrump tomorrow! 
 My wife  will be joining   tonight at 8pmE on  Enjoy! 
 Governor Alejandro García Padilla said presidential hopeful Sen. Marco Rubio “is no friend of Puerto Rico." 
 #Trump2016 #TrumpInstagram:  http://someotherlink.com/
 I am self funding my campaign and only work for YOU, the American people! #Trump2016 Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Join me in Columbus, Ohio tomorrow! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you America! Get out & VOTE tomorrow! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  http://someotherlink.com/
 My sons, Don and Eric, are on  now 7:35. Great kids, enjoy!
 Thank you  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 THANK YOU ALABAMA! 32,000 supporters tonight. Get out & VOTE on Tuesday! WE WILL MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! 
 Our law enforcement officers deserve our appreciation for the incredible job they do. Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 I will be making a big surprise announcement to the massive crowd assembled in Huntsville/Madison Alabama! Landing now! #Trump2016
 Phylis Schlafly: 'Marco Rubio Betrayed Us All' 
 Little Marco Rubio treated America's ICE officers "like absolute trash" in order to pass Obama's amnesty. 
 Little Marco Rubio gave amnesty to criminal aliens guilty of "sex offenses." DISGRACE! 
 Little Marco Rubio is just another Washington D.C. politician that is all talk and no action. #RobotRubio 
 Lightweight Senator Marco Rubio is polling very poorly in Florida. The people can't stand him for missing so many votes - poor work ethic!
 Little Marco Rubio, the lightweight no show Senator from Florida is just another Washington politician. 
 Mitt Romney didn't show his tax return until SEPTEMBER 21, 2012, and then only after being humiliated by Harry R! A bad messenger for estab!
 As I stated at the press conference on Friday regarding David Duke- I disavow. 
 Why would the people of Texas support Ted Cruz when he has accomplished absolutely nothing for them. He is another all talk, no action pol!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Little Marco Rubio, the lightweight no show Senator from Florida, is set to be the "puppet" of the special interest Koch brothers. WATCH!
 Making a big speech in Alabama today. So many people we had to move to a football stadium! Come and join us!
 I am the only Republican who will get large numbers of Dems and Indies (crossover). I will also get states that no other Republican can get.
 While Hillary and I both won South Carolina by big margins, Repubs got far more votes with a massive increase from past cycles.GROWING PARTY
 The Republican Establishment has been pushing for lightweight Senator Marco Rubio to say anything to "hit" Trump.I signed the pledge-careful
 While I hear the Koch brothers are in big financial trouble (oil), word is they have chosen little Marco Rubio, the lightweight from Florida
 We need to fix our broken education system! #StopCommonCore  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 THANK YOU Arkansas! Get out & #VoteTrump on Tuesday. We will MAKE AMERICA SAFE & GREAT AGAIN! 
 Incredibly proud of my son  & his efforts on behalf of  in Memphis, TN.  http://someotherlink.com/
 It was an honor to be the Grand Marshall- in the Salute to Israel Parade back in 2004. 
 Just watched lightweight Marco Rubio lying to a small crowd about my past record. He is not as smart as Cruz, and may be an even bigger liar
 .#RogerStone was just banned by  - their loss! Tough, loyal guy.
 I started my business with very little and built it into a great company, with some of the best real estate assets in the World. Amazing!
 I only wish my wonderful father, Fred, gave me $200 million to start my business like lightweight Rubio says. He didn't - total fabrication!
 Fun to watch the Democrats working so hard to win the great State of South Carolina when I just won the Republican version - amazing people!
 I am self-funding my campaign and am therefore not controlled by the lobbyists and special interests like lightweight Rubio or Ted Cruz!
 Tax experts throughout the media agree that no sane person would give their tax returns during an audit. After the audit, no problem!
 I unfairly get audited by the I.R.S. almost every single year. I have rich friends who never get audited. I wonder why?
 I will be on  at 8:30 A.M. Will be talking about lightweight Marco Rubio and lying Ted Cruz!
 Thank you Pastor Robert Jeffress! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 What I would do on my first day in office. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain Watch:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you Texas! 10,000 amazing  supporters! #Trump2016  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Never let them see you sweat! 
 Thank you for your support &  friendship- Governor  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 They don't like Rubio in Florida- he left them high & dry. Doesn't even show up for votes!
 Lightweight Marco Rubio was working hard last night. The problem is, he is a choker, and once a choker, always a choker! Mr. Meltdown.
 Wow, every poll said I won the debate last night. Great honor!
 Lightweight choker Marco Rubio looks like a little boy on stage. Not presidential material!
 Lying Ted Cruz and lightweight choker  Marco Rubio teamed up last night in a last ditch effort to stop our great movement. They failed!
 Will be at Fort Worth (Texas) Convention Center at 11:30 A.M. Big crowd - get there early! Big announcement to be made!
 Why would the people of Florida vote for Marco Rubio when he defrauded them by agreeing to represent them as their Senator and then quit!
 Have a good chance to win Texas on Tuesday. Cruz is a nasty guy, not one Senate endorsement and, despite talk, gets nothing done. Loser!
 I will be making a speech at 12:00 in Fort Worth, Texas. Really big crowd expected. Will be talking about the debate last night-plus, plus!
 Big day in Texas tomorrow! Having a rally in Fort Worth. Tremendous crowd. Will be exciting! #Trump2016 
 All the online polls have me winning the debate. I really enjoyed the evening. Not easy, but good. 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you! #GOPDebate Polls  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
                         2016|#MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Thank you! WE WILL MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! #Trump2016 
 Failed presidential candidate  was made to look like a fool by Senator Harry Reid & didn't release his tax returns until 9/21/12.
 THANK YOU!   #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 FMR PRES of Mexico, Vicente Fox horribly used the F word when discussing the wall. He must apologize! If I did that there would be a uproar!
 Early on Ted Cruz said that if he didn't win South Carolina, it's over. He didn't win- and lost to me in a landslide!
 Thank you Illinois! #Trump2016 
 Join me in Oklahoma tomorrow night! #MakeYoutubeGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I'm going to do what  was totally unable to do- WIN!
 LETS MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! Schedule & tickets:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Signing a recent tax return- isn't this ridiculous? 
 Just for your info, tax returns have 0 to do w/ someone’s net worth. I have already filed my financial statements w/ FEC. They are great!
 Why doesn’t  just endorse  already. Should have done it before NH or Nevada where he had a little sway. Too late now!
 Mitt Romney, who was one of the dumbest and worst candidates in the history of Republican politics, is now pushing me on tax returns. Dope!
 Great new poll. Thank you Texas! #VoteTrump #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Ted Cruz is lying again. Polls are showing that I do beat Hillary Clinton head to head. Check out  Poll snd Q Poll.
 Texas, Georgia & many more VOTE EARLY! This is a movement! #Trump2016 VOTE VIDEO:  http://someotherlink.com/
 .  Chris, thank you so much for your wonderful endorsement. I will not let you down! 
 When Ted Cruz quits the race and the field begins to clear, I will get most of his votes - no problem!
 Why would Texans vote for "liar" Ted Cruz when he was born in Canada, lived there for 4 years-and remained a Canadian citizen until recently
 When Mitt Romney asked me for my endorsement last time around, he was so awkward and goofy that we all should have known he could not win!
 Mitt Romney,who totally blew an election that should have been won and whose tax returns made him look like a fool, is now playing tough guy
 The polls show that I picked up many Jeb Bush supporters. That is how I got to 46%. When others drop out, I will pick up more.  Sad but true
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! 
 In all of television- the only one who said anything bad about last nights landslide victory-- was dopey  He should be fired!
 I am in Virginia  Presidential forum with Dr. Pat Robertson- beginning now! Watch here: 
 I am self funding my campaign & don't owe anybody anything! I only owe it to the American people! #Trump2016 Watch: 
 . Poll and  say that I beat both Hillary and Bernie, and I havn't even started on them yet!
 Big defeat last night in Nevada for Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio.  on  is working hard to belittle my victory. Rove is sick!
  did great on television this morning. Poised, smart and strong, with a big heart - so much to offer. We are all proud of you!
 Melania will be interviewed by  on  now (8:30 A.M.). ENJOY!
 THANK YOU NEVADA! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain   Username: realdonaldtrump  http://someotherlink.com/
 THANK YOU NEVADA! WE WILL MAKE AMERICA SAFE & GREAT AGAIN!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Make sure you get on the Trump line and are not mislead by the Cruz people. They are bad! BE CAREFUL.
 Exclusive interview w/ my wife  tomorrow morning  8amE on  w/   Enjoy! 
 GO VOTE FROM NOW TO 8:30 P.M. NEVADA. I WILL BE AT VARIOUS CAUCUS SITES. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 My wife Melania will be on   tomorrow morning at 8:00. Interviewed by  - Enjoy!
 Thank you Sparks, Nevada! #VoteTrumpNV   #NevadaCaucus Finder:  http://someotherlink.com/ 
 Club for Growth is the group that came to my office seeking $1 million dollars. I told them no and now they are doing negative ads.
 Great. Just reported on  that many people who supported  are now supporting me. I knew that would happen, pundits didn't!
 Wow, great Ohio poll. Shows me leading by 5 points, beating K!
 Unlike the other Republican candidates, I will be in Nevada all day and night - I won't be fleeing, in and out. I love & invest in Nevada!
 Join us in Sparks, Nevada today!  #NevadaCaucus #VoteTrumpNV 
 I am growing the Republican Party tremendously - just look at the numbers, way up! Democrats numbers are significantly down from years past.
 Ted Cruz lifts the Bible high into the air and then lies like a dog-over and over again! The Evangelicals in S.C. figured him out & said no!
 Ted Cruz does not have the right "temperment" to be President. Look at the way he totally panicked in firing his director of comm. BAD!
 Wow was Ted Cruz disloyal to his very capable director of communication. He used him as a scape goat-fired like a dog! Ted panicked.
 Ted Cruz only talks tough on immigration now because he did so badly in S.C. He is in favor of amnesty and weak on illegal immigration.
 THANK YOU LAS VEGAS, NEVADA! #NevadaCaucus #VoteTrumpNV  http://someotherlink.com/
 Join me live- now in Las Vegas, Nevada! We will MAKE AMERICA SAFE & GREAT AGAIN! #VoteTrumpNV #NevadaCaucus 
 Ted Cruz said on  that illegals sent out of country by my administration would come right back as citizens. Another lie-crazy!
 A big fat hit job on  tonight. A total waste of time to watch, boring and biased.  said I would never run, a dope!
 Great Town Hall tonight at 10:00 P.M. (Eastern) conducted by  on 
 Thank you Vermont! #VoteTrumpVT 
 Thank you Michigan! #VoteTrumpMI Trump 35% Kasich 17% Cruz 12% Rubio 12% Carson 9%  Via: ARG
 Great poll! Thank you North Carolina!  #VoteTrumpNC on 3/15! Trump 36% Cruz 18% Rubio 18% Carson 10% Kasich 7% Via 
 WOW! Thank you Massachusetts! See you soon. #VoteTrumpMA 
 Just watched the very incompetent Mitt Romney Campaign Strategist, Stuart Stevens. Now I know why Mitt lost so badly. Stevens is a clown!
 Thank you Illinois! Great news! #VoteTrumpIL on 3/15! Trump 28% Cruz 15% Rubio 14% Kasich 13% Bush 8% Carson 6% Simon Poll/SIU
 I will be on  tonight- from Las Vegas, Nevada at 10pmE. Enjoy! #Hannity #Trump2016 
 Ted Cruz should be disqualified from his fraudulent win in Iowa. Weak RNC and Republican leadership probably won't let this happen! Sad.
 Just saw the phony ad by Cruz - totally false, more dirty tricks. He got caught in so many lies - is this man crazy?
 Ted Cruz has now apologized to Marco Rubio and Ben Carson for fraud and dirty tricks. No wonder he has lost Evangelical support!
 Ted Cruz has been playing an ad about me that is so ridiculously false - no basis in fact. Take ad down Ted. Biggest liar in politics!
 Wow, Ted Cruz falsely suggested Marco Rubio mocked the Bible and was just forced to fire his Communications Director. More dirty tricks!
 It is so important to audit The Federal Reserve, and yet Ted Cruz missed the vote on the bill that would allow this to be done.
 Thank you for your endorsement  #BikersForTrump #VoteTrumpNV Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Many people are now saying I won South Carolina because of the last debate. I showed anger and the people of our country are very angry!
 I hear the Rickets family, who own the Chicago Cubs, are secretly spending $'s against me. They better be careful, they have a lot to hide!
 The reason that Ted Cruz lost the Evangelicals in S.C. is because he is a world class LIAR, and Evangelicals do not like liars!
 I am in Las Vegas, at the best hotel (by far), Trump International. I will be working with my wonderful teams and volunteers to WIN Nevada!
 A number of months ago, I was not expected to win South Carolina,Ted Cruz was, and yet I won in a landslide - every group and category. WIN!
 THANK YOU Atlanta, Georgia! Leaving for Nevada now. Lets MAKE AMERICA SAFE AND GREAT AGAIN!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you South Carolina! 
 A quote was read from a parody account last night on MSNBC re: Jeb. 
 The failing  Wall Street Journal should fire both its pollster and its Editorial Board. Seldom has a paper been so wrong.Totally biased!
 I will be live on all of the major morning talk shows. Enjoy!
 Thank you  for your amazing help and support. Big win, leaving now for Atlanta and Nevada.The people of South Carolina got it!
 What a great night. Thank you South Carolina, a special place with truly amazing people! LOVE
 People (pundits) gave me no chance in South Carolina. Now it looks like a possible win. I would be happy with a one vote victory! (HOPE)
 South Carolina voters have the future of our country in their hands. Vote now (today), and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Remember that Marco Rubio is very weak on illegal immigration. South Carolina needs strength as illegals and Syrians pour in. Don't allow it
 I wonder if President Obama would have attended the funeral of Justice Scalia if it were held in a Mosque? Very sad that he did not go!
 I am the only candidate (in many years) who is self-funding his campaign. Lobbyists and $ interests totally control all other candidates!
 Lying #Ted Cruz just (on election day) came out with a sneak and sleazy Robocall. He holds up the Bible but in fact is a true lowlife pol!
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Just finished two major speeches in South Carolina. Big crowds, great people. Going for a third now!
 Boycott all Apple products  until such time as Apple gives cellphone info to authorities regarding radical Islamic terrorist couple from Cal
 Hopefully others will follow suit. Our country needs & should demand security. It is time to get tough & be smart!
 I use both iPhone & Samsung. If Apple doesn't give info to authorities on the terrorists I'll only be using Samsung until they give info.
 I have built so many great & complicated projects– creating tens of thousands of jobs-video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Remember, Cruz and Bush gave us Roberts who upheld #ObamaCare twice! I am the only one who will #MAKEAMERICAGREATAGAIN!
 I’m self-funding and I am going to take care of the people – not the special interests and insurance companies like the other candidates.
 I will replace it with private plans, health savings accounts, & allow purchasing across state lines. Maximum choice & freedom for consumer.
 I was referring to a backstop for pre-existing conditions. I will eliminate the law, in its entirety, & replace it w/ something much better.
 I was asked about healthcare by Anderson Cooper & have been consistent- I will repeal all of #ObamaCare, including the mandate, period.
 A message from  #SCPrimary #VoteTrumpSC #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you South Carolina! Everyone get out and vote tomorrow! We will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Tonight I will be on  with  at 10pm and  w/  at 10:10pm. Enjoy! #VoteTrumpSC #Trump2016
 We will MAKE AMERICA SAFE & GREAT AGAIN! #Trump2016 #VoteTrumpSC  http://someotherlink.com/
 Join us Saturday night- for the South Carolina Primary Watch Party! #SCPrimary #Trump2016 
 Join us tomorrow night in Charleston, South Carolina! #SCPrimary #Trump2016 
 Response to the Pope: 
 I agree with Marco Rubio that Ted Cruz is a liar!
 . is changing their  theme from "fair and balanced" to "unfair and unbalanced." But dying  is worse.Their phony poll is a  joke!
 Thank you South Carolina! Together, WE WILL MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! #VoteTrumpSC 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you America! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 New CBS National Poll just out - massive lead for Trump. The Wall Street Journal/NBC Poll is a total joke. No wonder WSJ is doing so badly!
 I love being in South Carolina. We are leading big in all of the State polls - Saturday is a BIG day. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 The just out USA Today National Poll, where I lead by big numbers, shows that in a head to head matchup, I beat both Hillary and Bernie.
 Amazing that while I lead by big numbers in the new Q and and USA Today polls, the the press only wants to report on the phony WSJ/NBC poll.
 Join us tomorrow in Kiawah, South Carolina! #SCPrimary #VoteTrumpSC #Trump2016 
 THANK YOU AMERICA!  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you Nevada! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Jeb Bush just got contact lenses and got rid of the glasses. He wants to look cool, but it's far too late. 1% in Nevada!
 Just out Nevada poll shows Jeb Bush at 1%, he should take his dumb mouthpiece,  and just go home.
 . is so biased it is disgusting. They do not want Trump to win. All negative!
 I will beat Hillary easily, but Lindsey Graham says I won't, and yet he got zero against me- no cred! Why does FOX put him on?
 . who had zero in his presidential run before dropping out in disgrace- saying the most horrible things about me on 
 Interesting how President Obama so haltingly said I "would never be president" - This from perhaps the worst president in U.S. history!
 Why does  devote so much time on her shows to me, almost always negative?  Without me her ratings would tank. Get a life Megyn!
 Thank you   for your nice words - great knowledge and style! We are doing really well in South Carolina.  
 . thinks that when Republicans drop out of the race, someone will pick up ALL of that vote. The fact is I will get much of it!
 Explain to  and  who know nothing, that I will beat Hillary and win states (and dem-indie votes) that no other R can!
 Will be interviewed by  tonight by phone- a late show first   Enjoy!  #Colbert #LSSC
 Thank you, South Carolina! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you to the 2,500+ in North Augusta, South Carolina. Lines down the block! Don't forget to VOTE on Saturday! 
 Unreal! Highly respected Senator Tom Coburn- said this about Cruz: 
 #TeamTrump is thinking of Captain Andrew Maitner. A true American hero. #MaitnerStrong  http://someotherlink.com/
 Just sat down for a great interview with  in Greenville today. Watch at 5pm. An amazing day in South Carolina! #VoteTrumpSC
 Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 New PPP Poll just out - Trump up big, Cruz, Rubio and Bush down. The debate results, even with a stacked RNC audience, were wonderful!
 Spent the full day at meetings and a major rally yesterday in South Carolina. Great people and spirit. Today will be more of the same.
 New South Carolina poll from PPP. Thank you! #VoteTrumpSC 
 What a night! 10,000 amazing supporters in Greenville, South Carolina! THANK YOU! VOTE on Saturday! #VoteTrumpSC 
 Thank you for your continued support! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 RESPONSE TO THE LIES OF SENATOR CRUZ:  #Trump2016 #VoteTrumpSC
 JEB is a hypocrite! Used massive private "Eminent Domain" --- Just another clueless politician! 
 Jeb used Eminent Domain & took advantage of a disabled vet in the process. (2/2) 
 I'd like to call JEB a liar, but the truth is he has no clue & never revealed that he used Eminent Domain- when criticizing me! (1/2)
 Now that George Bush is campaigning for Jeb(!), is he fair game for questions about World Trade Center, Iraq War and eco collapse? Careful!
 I will be in South Carolina all week. Saturday is BIG, BIG, BIG! Get out and vote - MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN
 Jeb Bush and Ted Cruz are not electable presidential candidates, Hillary would destroy them. Ted may not be eligible to run - born in Canada
 Funny that Jeb(!) didn't want help from his family in his failed campaign and didn't even want to use his last name.Then mommy, now brother!
 Ted Cruz, along with Jeb Bush, pushed Justice John Roberts onto the Supreme Court. Roberts could have killed ObamaCare twice, but didn't!
 Wow, in the new CBS Poll I went way up into the forties! Thank you!
 Tickets for future debates should be put out to the general public instead of being given to the lobbyists & special interests - the bosses!
 Loved the debate last night, and almost everyone said I won, but the RNC did a terrible job of ticket distrbution. All donors & special ints
 Thank you for your support! TOGETHER we will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!  http://someotherlink.com/
 I will be on Face the Nation with John Dickerson on CBS this morning. Enjoy!
 This shows what a complete & total liar Ted Cruz is- he said he wouldn't have nominated John Roberts. Really? 
 Even though every poll, Time, Drudge etc., has me winning the debate by a lot,  only puts negative people on. Biased - a total joke!
 #GOPDebate #GoogleTrends 
 Hey  see how I beat your boy Ted- in your own Blaze poll? Your endorsement means nothing! #GOPDebate
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 All polls have me winning debate big- Drudge, TIME, etc. Dopey Charles Krauthammer still nasty. He has zero cred- totally dishonest!
 How can  beat Hillary Clinton- if he can't beat anyone else on the #GOPDebate stage with $150M? I am the only one who can!
 Thank you! I miss my father. 
 Lightweight  said tonight he didn't know his family used private eminent domain in Texas- Lie!  #GOPDebate
 On the way to the #GOPDebate with my wonderful wife   http://someotherlink.com/
 Ted Cruz is a cheater! He holds the Bible high and then lies and misrepresents the facts!
 Nasty Ted Cruz is at it again- same dirty tricks he used w/  saying I may not be on ballot & I hold liberal positions. LIES!
 Wow! Honored to be chosen by the highly respected + accurate Washington & Lee Mock Convention. I hope you are right - I will make you proud!
 The totally unexpected loss of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia is a massive setback for the Conservative movement and our COUNTRY!
 Love the people of South Carolina - look very much forward to the debate tonight.
 Thank you, South Carolina! We will MAKE AMERICA SAFE & GREAT AGAIN!  http://someotherlink.com/
 A very big thank you to Bill Donohue, head of The Catholic League, for the wonderful interview on  and article in Newsmax! Great insight
 Totally unauthorized, do not pay. I am self funding my campaign! Notice has just been withdrawn. #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 The RNC, which is probably not on my side, just illegally put out a fundraising notice saying Trump wants you to contribute to the RNC.
 Now an additional 600-700 jobs in America (2,000) being eliminated for move to Mexico- via Hartford Courant. 
 I am the only one who can fix this. Very sad. Will not happen under my watch! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Just got back from Tampa. It was an amazing evening with an even more amazing crowd - fantastic people! Will be in South Carolina tomorrow.
 Word is that little Morty Zuckerman’s  loses more than $50 million per year---can that be possible?
 When little Morty Zuckerman closes his failing  will I at least be given some credit? Will happen soon.
 11,000 inside venue tonight in Tampa! Broke record set by Elton John in 1988 w/out musical instruments! Another 5,000 outside. Will be back!
 I will end illegal immigration and protect our borders! We need to MAKE AMERICA SAFE & GREAT AGAIN! #Trump2016 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Millions of $'s of false ads,  paid for by lobbyists-special interests of cheater   and sleepy  are now running in S.C.
 Last time lightweight  tried to knock off  he made a total fool of himself. If he doesn't do better this time, he is out!
 If  doesn’t clean up his act, stop cheating, & doing negative ads, I have standing to sue him for not being a natural born citizen.
 Lightweight  is spending a fortune of special interest against me in SC. False advertising- desperate and sad!
 After hearing the news that they would not be able to extort $1M from me, they went hostile w/ a series of incorrect & ill-informed ads.
 Nothing conservative about the Club for Growth coming into my office and demanding a $1M contribution, which naturally, they did not get.
 You must be registered Republican by February 16th to vote TRUMP in the Florida primary.  http://someotherlink.com/
 The failing  destroyed by little Morty Zuckerman, is preparing to close and save face by going online. It's dead!
 NEVADA! Tomorrow is the deadline to register Republican.  Visit:   Message from  
 How can Ted Cruz be an Evangelical Christian when he lies so much and is so dishonest?
 Lying Cruz put out a statement, “Trump & Rubio are w/Obama on gay marriage." Cruz is the worst liar, crazy or very dishonest. Perhaps all 3?
 Weak JEB getting thrown out by management during speech. Do you think he will be this tough on Putin & others? 
 THANK YOU- Baton Rouge, Louisiana! WE will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! #Trump2016 
 Just landed in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Reports are out that lines are three quarters of a mile to get in. Wow! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Cruz caught cold in lie after denial of push polls like lies w/  How can he preach Christian values? 
 Heading to Baton Rouge, Louisiana for a speech. Expecting a very large crowd! See you soon. #Trump2016  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Will be interviewed tonight on  tonight at 10pm EST. Enjoy your evening! #Trump2016
 We are getting reports from many voters that the Cruz people are back to doing very sleazy and dishonest "pushpolls" on me. We are watching!
 Jeb failed as Jeb! He gave up and enlisted Mommy and his brother (who got us into the quicksand of Iraq). Spent $120 million.Weak-no chance!
 He (or she) who hesitates is lost: MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Remember, it was the Republican Party, with the help of Conservatives, that made so many promises to their base, BUT DIDN'T KEEP THEM! Hi DT
 . showed a focus group on  me using a very bad word. I never said the word, left an open blank. Please apologize!
 Jeb Bush spent more than $40,000,000 in New Hampshire to come in 4 or 5, I spent $3,000,000 to come in 1st. Big difference in capability!
 There are no buyers for the worthless  but little Mort Zuckerman is frantically looking. It is bleeding red ink - a total loser!
 I have been consistent in my opposition to Common Core. Get rid of Common Core--- keep education local!
 THANK YOU- Clemson, South Carolina! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #SCPrimary 
 I was referring to the fact that Jeb Bush wants to keep common core.
 Big speech tonight in South Carolina - 7:00 P.M. Tremendous crowd!
 So funny, Jeb Bush called me a "highly gifted politician and a great entertainer" - I assume that is a compliment!
 Such a great experience in New Hampshire - amazing people! Will be leaving for a big event in South Carolina today.
 Like the worthless  looks like  will be going out of business. Bad reporting- no money, no cred!
 Worthless  which dopey Mort Zuckerman, is desperately trying to sell, has no buyer! Liabilities are massive!
 Dopey Mort Zuckerman, owner of the worthless  has a major inferiority complex. Paper will close soon!
 Will be on  at 8:15 A.M.
 Thank you to the people of  New Hampshire, I love you! Now, off to South Carolina.
 Thank you, New Hampshire! Departing with my amazing family now! #FITN #NHPrimary  http://someotherlink.com/
 We will stop heroin and other drugs from coming into New Hampshire from our open southern border. We will build a WALL and have security.
 We will immediately repeal and replace ObamaCare - and nobody can do that like me. We will save $'s and have much better healthcare!
 ISIS is making big threats today - no respect for U.S.A. or our "leader" - If I win it will be a very different story,with very fast results
 New Hampshire vote today -  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 You can find your polling locations at:  #FITN #NHPrimary #VoteTrumpNH 
 A message to the great people of New Hampshire on this important day! #VoteTrumpNH  Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you for a great night at the Verizon Wireless Arena- New Hampshire! #VoteTrumpNH #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #FITN 
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I will be interviewed on  at 8:40. A.M. Enjoy!
 The polls are now showing that I am the best to win the GENERAL ELECTION. States that are never in play for Repubs will be won by me. Great!
 No-one has done more for people with disabilities than me. I have spent many millions of dollars to help out-and am happy to have done so!
 I know the "Governors" and Jeb Bush, who has gone nasty with lies, is by far the weakest of the lot. His family used private eminent domain!
 Remember  wants COMMON CORE (education from D.C.) and is very weak on ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION ("come as act of love"). Not a leader!
 Thank you, New Hampshire! #FITN 
 Thank you, New Hampshire!  #FITN #NHPrimary #VoteTrumpNH   Voting questions?  http://someotherlink.com/
 #VoteTrumpNH #NHPrimary #FITN 
 Now that Bush has wasted $120 million of special interest money on his failed campaign, he says he would end super PACs. Sad!
 Today's third stop- Londonderry, New Hampshire! Thank you! #FITN #VoteTrumpNH 
 America needs strong leadership. Politicians can talk but they don’t get things done. Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Everybody is laughing at Jeb Bush-spent $100 million and is at bottom of pack. A pathetic figure!
 Jeb Bush is desperate - strongly in favor of #CommonCore and very weak on illegal immigration.
 Thank you for your support at this mornings Town Hall- in Salem, New Hampshire. #FITN #NHPrimary 
 Jeb Bush has zero communication skills so he spent a fortune of special interest money on a Super Bowl ad. He is a weak candidate!
 My two wonderful sons, Don and Eric, will be on  at 7:02 - now! Enjoy.
 So far the Super Bowl is very boring - not nearly as exciting as politics - MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I am in New Hampshire having a great time! Loved the #GOPDebate last night! Everybody enjoy the Super Bowl. #SuperBowlSunday #SB50
 Thank you- Plymouth, New Hampshire! #FITN #NHPrimary 
 Thank you Newt! 
 We are going to have a big event at the Verizon Wireless Arena in Manchester, New Hampshire! 5K+! Join us tomorrow: 
 Great to meet everyone while having breakfast  this morning! #FITN #VoteTrumpNH  http://someotherlink.com/
 . #GOPDebate #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #FITN 
 I will be on Meet the Press with Chuck Todd on NBC this morning. Enjoy! 
 I am on  now! Tune in!
 I will be on State of the Union  with  at 9am. Enjoy!
 Come join us at the Verizon Wireless Center- Manchester, New Hampshire on 2/8! Register now:  http://someotherlink.com/
 I love New Hampshire - will be an exciting evening!
 Join me tomorrow in Plymouth, New Hampshire! #FITN #NHPrimary 
 The New Hampshire drug epidemic must stop. If elected POTUS- I will create borders & the drugs will stop pouring in. 
 Wow, Jeb Bush, whose campaign is a total disaster, had to bring in mommy to take a slap at me. Not nice!
 Border agent: "We might as well abolish our immigration laws altogether" 
 I said this was happening long ago- I will stop this immediately! 
 It never ends! 
 I told you so. Our country totally lost control of illegal immigration, even with criminals. 
 10,000 people in South Carolina, unbelievable evening! Will be in New Hampshire tomorrow- love it. 
 Really dumb  Begged my people for a job. Turned her down twice and she went hostile. Major loser, zero credibility!
 Join me at Clemson University on Wednesday, February 10th! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Heading to South Carolina, really big crowd! Will be back in New Hampshire tomorrow. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Such great support in New Hampshire. So many people are working so hard to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 I very much look forward to tomorrow’s debate in New Hampshire—so many things to say, so much at stake. It will be an incredible evening!
 Live Free or Die: A motto for the whole country to follow. #NewHampshire #FITN #VoteTrumpNH 
 Big storm in New Hampshire. Moved my event to Monday. Will be there next four days.
 Join us Monday, February 8th  the Verizon Wireless Arena in Manchester, New Hampshire! #FITN #NHPolitics #Trump2016 
 Watch  on NOW! 
 I will be interviewed by Anderson Cooper at 8pm on  from New Hampshire. Should be very interesting!
 Taking a helicopter to New Hampshire, boarding now. Amazing activity planned. New UMASS poll, very nice! 
 Politicians are trying to chip away at the 2nd Amendment. I won’t let them take away our guns! #Trump2016 Watch: 
 This is the Cruz voter violation certificate sent to everyone, a misdemeanor at minimum. 
 .  as per the show, an even more serious Cruz charge is the fraudulent voter violation certificate sent to everyone.
 #ICYMI:  &  discuss what Ted Cruz did to the great people of Iowa- as they went to vote. 
 Thank you  &  Ted Cruz should be immediately disqualified in Iowa, with each candidate moving up one notch.
 Sanders says he wants to run against me because he doesn't want to run against me. He would be so easy to beat!
 THANK YOU to everyone in Little Rock, Arkansas tonight! A record crowd of 12K. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Stop the assault on American values. Stand w/ Trump to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! #VotersSpeak:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you New Hampshire! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #FITN 
 Dr. Ben Carson blasted Ted Cruz for "deceit and dirty tricks and lies."
 Cruz just lied again- I am, and have been totally against #ObamaCare- repeal and replace!
 The State of Iowa should disqualify Ted Cruz from the most recent election on the basis that he cheated- a total fraud!
 This was sent out from Ted Cruz- as Iowans arrived at their caucus sites to vote. #CruzFraud 
 I will be interviewed on  at 7:00 P.M. Enjoy! 
 Based on the fraud committed by Senator Ted Cruz during the Iowa Caucus, either a new election should take place or Cruz results nullified.
 And finally, Cruz strongly told thousands of caucusgoers (voters) that Trump was strongly in favor of ObamaCare and "choice" - a total lie!
 The Voter Violation certificate gave poor marks to the unsuspecting voter(grade of F) and told them to clear it up by voting for Cruz. Fraud
 Many people voted for Cruz over Carson because of this Cruz fraud. Also, Cruz sent out a VOTER VIOLATION certificate to thousands of voters.
 During primetime of the Iowa Caucus, Cruz put out a release that  was quitting the race, and to caucus (or vote) for Cruz.
 Ted Cruz didn't win Iowa, he stole it. That is why all of the polls were so wrong and why he got far more votes than anticipated. Bad!
 Great job on  tonight    begged us for a job. We said no and she went hostile. A real dummy! 
 On my way to New Hampshire- expecting a big and spirited crowd!  #FITN #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Anybody who watched all of Ted Cruz's far too long, rambling, overly flamboyant speech last nite would say that was his Howard Dean moment!
 .   on  He finished 2nd but he made the turn successfully like a pro"
 I don't believe I have been given any credit by the voters for self-funding my campaign, the only one. I will keep doing, but not worth it!
 I will be talking about my wonderful experience in Iowa and the simultaneous unfair treatment by the media-later in New Hampshire. Big crowd
 The media has not covered my long-shot great finish in Iowa fairly. Brought in record voters and got second highest vote total in history!
 Because I was told I could not do well in Iowa, I spent very little there - a fraction of Cruz & Rubio. Came in a strong second. Great honor
 My experience in Iowa was a great one. I started out with all of the experts saying I couldn't do well there and ended up in 2nd place. Nice
 Time to get out & caucus!   &  will be out at:  http://someotherlink.com/
 The time to caucus is approaching! #CaucusForTrump #IACaucus  #iCaucused  #iVoted  http://someotherlink.com/
 #IowaCaucus #CaucusForTrump  http://someotherlink.com/
 A message to the great people of Iowa on this historic day.  Find your caucus site here:  http://someotherlink.com/
 It all begins today - WE WILL FINALLY TAKE OUR COUNTRY BACK AND MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 #IACaucus #CaucusForTrump 
 Join us! #CaucusForTrump 11am WATERLOO:  1:30pm CEDER RAPIDS:  http://someotherlink.com/
 . & his wife  attended the #SnowflakeGardenBrunch- here w/ Governor  
 Watch  show you how easy it is to #CaucusForTrump in Iowa! #IACaucus Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 So nice to get an endorsement from the founder and owner of Pizza Ranch in Iowa! A great guy and great places! #CaucusForTrump
 It is time to take back our country- and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! #CaucusForTrump Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 I will be interviewed on Face The Nation with  this morning. Enjoy!
 I am in Iowa. Will be interviewed on This Week With   this morning. ENJOY!
 If I would have done the last debate, a record would have been set (instead of the poor ratings recieved). Also, VETS got $6,000,000.
 By not doing the failed, poorly rated debate, I was able to make the point of not allowing "unfairness" - while raising $6,000,000 for VETS.
 Wow, just saw an ad - Cruz is lying on so many levels. There is nobody more against ObamaCare than me, will repeal & replace. He lies!
 Ted Cruz is in trouble for not reporting his bank borrowing in his very important Financial Disclosure Form. Very low interest loans, scam!
 Ted Cruz is totally unelectable, if he even gets to run (born in Canada). Will loose big to Hillary. Polls show I beat Hillary easily! WIN!
 I will be going to church in Iowa this morning with my wife, Melania. After church I will be making two speeches and touring the State!
 . is a total phony and con man. When I wouldn't give him free hotel rooms and much more, he endorsed Cruz. 
 . asked me to do an event. The people holding the event called me to say he wanted $100,000 for himself.Phony 
 . is a total phony and dishonest guy. Asked me for expensive hotel rooms, free (and more). I said pay and he endorsed Cruz!
 The Cruz campaign issued a dishonest and deceptive get out the vote ad calling voters "in violation." They are now under investigation. Bad!
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!  #IACaucus #CaucusForTrump  http://someotherlink.com/
 #IACaucus #CaucusForTrump #iCaucused #iVoted 
 I want to thank evangelical Christians for the warm embrace I've received on the campaign trail. Video: 
 I will be in Iowa all day and until Tuesday morning. Finally, after all these years of watching stupidity, we will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Hillary Clinton is a major national security risk. Not presidential material!
 THANK YOU to all of the incredible volunteers, behind the scenes in Iowa! #CaucusForTrump  http://someotherlink.com/
 Looking forward to a great weekend in Iowa! #IACaucus #CaucusForTrump  Tickets:  http://someotherlink.com/
 .  The people of Iowa love the fact that I stuck up for my rights, as I will do for the U.S. Also got $6,000,000 for our VETS!
 . is the only network that does not even mention my very successful event last night. $6,000,000 raised in one hour for our VETS.
 Amazing that Ted Cruz can't even get a Senator like  who is easy, to endorse him. Not one Senator  is endorsing Canada Ted!
 . looks more like a gym rat than a U.S. Senator. How the hell did he ever get elected?  
 The great State of Nebraska can do much better than  as your Senator. Saw him on  - totally ineffective. Wants paid for pols.
 The new e-mail release is a disaster for Hillary Clinton. At a minimum, how can someone with such bad judgement be our next president?
 Thank you for all of your support Iowa! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 #IACaucus finder:  http://someotherlink.com/
 They say that if I participated in last night’s Fox debate, they would have had 12 million more & would have broken the all time record.
 Thank you, America! #Trump2016 Via  
 Join me tomorrow in Dubuque, Iowa! #IACaucus #Trump2016 
 Thank you- Nashua, New Hampshire!  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you! Mitchell FOX2 Michigan Poll finds Trump holds 3-1 lead over closest GOP opponents.  Trump 47% Clinton 43% 
 Great Twitter poll- and I wasn't even there. Thank you! #GOPDebate 
 Getting ready to take off for Nashua, New Hampshire. Big crowd, will be there soon. Fun!
 Iowa was amazing last night. The event could not have worked out better. We raised $6,000,000 for our great vets. They were so happy & proud
 Thank you for your interest & support during last nights #GOPDebate! #IACaucus finder:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Good morning America! Thank you for all of your support in the latest Drudge poll!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you for your support! 
 Thank you, America! 
 #IACaucus • 2/1/2016 • 6:30pm #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!  Iowa caucus finder:  #GOPDebate 
 Thank you for the kind words tonight,  You were great! See you soon!
 I will take care of the Veterans who have served this country so bravely. #ThankAVet Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 An unbelievable night in Iowa with our great Veterans! We raised $6,000,000.00 while the politicians talked! #GOPDebate
 Watching biased Charles  a  flunky who didn't know that I won every debate, in particular- the last one. Check polls!
 #Trump2016 #IACaucus Finder:  http://someotherlink.com/
 I hear that  $$ man, Robert Mercer, a good man, is very angry because Cruz lied to him about liquidating his (Ted’s) holdings.?
 20 Most Anticipated Hotel Openings of 2016: Trump International Hotel, Washington D.C. 
 Tennessee GOP Poll  Trump 32.7% Cruz 16.5% Carson 6.6% Rubio 5.3% Christie 2.4% Jeb 1.6%
 It is my great honor to support our Veterans with you! You can join me now. Thank you! #Trump4Vets 
 #Trump2016 #IACaucus Finder:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Being politically correct takes too much time. We have too much to get done! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 “What America Needs: The Case for Trump” Great new book by the esteemed Jeffrey Lord  Available now. 
 The "debate" tonight will be a total disaster - low ratings with advertisers and advertising rates dropping like a rock. I hate to see this.
 Wow, two candidates called last night and said they want to go to my event tonight at Drake University.
 #Trump2016 #IACaucus Finder:  http://someotherlink.com/
 On Greta, 87% of the people said they would not watch the debate if I'm not in it. Wow- what an honor!
 FOX debate advertising rates falling like a rock! Tune into my special event for the Veterans at 9pm EST!
 Thank you- Lexington, South Carolina! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  http://someotherlink.com/
 It was the childishly written & taunting PR statement by Fox that made me not do the debate, more so than lightweight reporter, 
 I will be interviewed on  tonight at 8:00 P.M. (Eastern). Enjoy!
 I am self funding my campaign so I do not owe anything to lobbyists & special interests.  http://someotherlink.com/
 Even though I beat him in the first six debates, especially the last one, Ted Cruz wants to debate me again. Can we do it in Canada?
 Just got to listen to Rush Limbaugh - the guy is fantastic!
 The statement put out yesterday by  was a disgrace to good broadcasting and journalism. Who would ever say something so nasty & dumb
 I refuse to call Megyn Kelly a bimbo, because that would not be politically correct. Instead I will only call her a lightweight reporter!
 CBS's FACE THE NATION - Posts Largest Audience Since 2001 #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  http://someotherlink.com/
 Pathetic attempt by  to try and build up ratings for the #GOPDebate. Without me they'd have no ratings! 
 Thank you, America! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 THANK YOU! #Trump2016 #IACaucus finder:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Do you think  knows about  dealings? Actually, I doubt it!
 Should I do the #GOPdebate? 
 . begged me to do an event while asking organizers for $100,000 for himself—a bad guy!
 Great honor- Rev. Jerry Falwell Jr. of Liberty University, one of the most respected religious leaders in our nation, has just endorsed me!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 For the great people of Iowa, find your #IACaucus location at  - so important to vote! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Why doesn't phony   tell his followers all the times he asked for him and his family to stay at my hotels-didn't like paying
 I will end common core. It's a disaster.  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I will be interviewed by  on    at 7:30 A.M. Enjoy.
 I will be doing   this morning at around 7:00. Likewise, I will be doing  at around 7:00. Figure it out!
 Thank you - Farmington, New Hampshire! #FITN #Trump2016 
 Just landed in New Hampshire. Will be at the venue shortly. #FITN
 Phyllis Schlafly’s Eagle Forum: ‘National Review Will Be Defunct In The Next Year’ 
 Leaving now for New Hampshire. Big crowd- looking forward to it! #FITN
 Cruz lies are almost as bad as Jeb's. These politicians will do anything to stay at the trough!
 Cruz going down fast in recent polls- dropping like a rock. Lies never work!
 Ted Cruz is a nervous wreck. He is making reckless charges not caring for the truth! His poll #'s are way down!
 I will be on  with  from 5-7pm est. on 
 I will be on Morning's with Maria on the Fox Business Network tomorrow during the 7am and 8am ET hours.
 Find out where to #VoteTrump on caucus night in Iowa on 2/1/16! #IACaucus #FITN #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Obama's deal vs. Trump's deals- 
 Join us in Iowa, tomorrow! #IACaucus #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  3:00pm:   7:30pm: 
 I will be on The Situation Room with  from 5-7pm est on CNN
 I want to win for the people of this great country. The only people I will owe are the voters. #Trump2016  Video: 
 IPSOS/REUTERS POLL Thank you! #Trump2016  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 It's time for Ted Cruz to either settle his problem with the FACT that he was born in Canada and was a citizen of Canada, or get out of race
 Fox News Poll Thank you, New Hampshire! #FITN #Trump2016 
 New Fox News Poll Thank you, Iowa! #Trump2016  #IACaucus 
 I will make our Military so big, powerful & strong that no one will mess with us. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 I will be on Face The Nation this morning at various times across the U.S.   Enjoy!
 I will be on  this morning at various times across the U.S.   Enjoy!
 Love making correct predictions. National Review is over.  review-doomed
 Word is that crying  left the GOP and doesn't have the right to vote in the Republican primary. Dumb as a rock.
 Serious doubt in Illinois as to whether or not Cruz can run for President. First of many challenges. 
 Just left a great event in Pella. Going to church tomorrow in Muscatine, Iowa.
 I will be on FOX with the great  tonight at 9pm EST! Enjoy! #Trump2016
 . such an honor to get your endorsement. You are a fantastic guy! It will not be forgotten. Don and Eric say hello!
 Heading now to Pella, Iowa. Big crowd! Remember, Trump is a big buyer of Pella windows. See you soon!
 For the great people of Iowa, find your #IACaucus location at  So important to vote! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Just left Sioux Center, Iowa. My speech was very well received. Truly great people! Packed house- overflow!
 A wonderful story on Iowa voters by  of the  
 Failing  lost all credibility. Not only was he fired  FOX, he would have voted for Clinton over McCain. 
 Based on  conflict of interest and bias she should not be allowed to be a moderator of the next debate.
 Heading to Sioux County, Iowa, where the crowd is amazing. Dr. Robert Jeffress will make the introduction. Make America Great Again!
 Ted Cruz poll numbers are down big. Because he was born in Canada and was, until recently, a Canadian citizen, many believe he cannot run!
 I am in Iowa watching all of these phony T.V. ads by the other candidates. All bull, politicians are all talk and no action-it won't happen!
 . has been amazing. We will win and establish strong borders, we will build a WALL and Mexico will pay. We will be great again!
 I will be the greatest job-producing president in American history. #Trump2016 #VoteTrump  http://someotherlink.com/
 I am in Iowa. Will be making two speeches today. Good luck to all of the great folks on the East coast. Enjoy the beauty of the storm!
 A wonderful article by a writer who truly gets it. I am for the people and the people are for me. #Trump2016 
 Is Cruz honest? He is in bed w/ Wall St. & is funded by Goldman Sachs/Citi, low interest loans. No legal disclosure & never sold off assets.
 Cruz did not renounce his Canadian citizenship as a US Senator- only when he started to run for #POTUS. He could be Canadian Prime Minister.
 Cruz says I supported TARP, which gave $25 million to Goldman Sachs, the bank which loaned him the money he didn't disclose. Puppet!
 The only reason irrelevant  doesn't like me is I refused to do his failing show - asked many times. Very few listeners - sad!
 . one of the National Review lightweights, came to my office begging for money like a dog. Why doesn't he say that?
 Just watched Jeb's ad where he desperately needed mommy to help him. Jeb --- mom can't help you with ISIS, the Chinese or with Putin.
 Ted Cruz went down big in just released Reuters poll - what's going on? Is it Goldman Sachs/Citi loans or Canada?
 Rush Limbaugh is great, tells it as he sees it---really honorable guy! Thanks Rush! #Trump2016
 The tax scam Washington Post does among the most inaccurate stories of all. Really dishonest reporting.
 Just received the new Fox poll. Thank you, America! #Trump2016 
 Wow! New National Zogby Poll just out:.TRUMP 45. CRUZ 13. RUBIO 8. Big numbers.
 Leaving Nevada now for Iowa. Things are looking good - great new polls!
 New National GOP Zogby Poll #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 New Reuters poll! Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 The dying  National Review has totally given up the fight against Barrack Obama. They have been losing for years. I will beat Hillary!
 Wow! This might be my highest # yet! Thank you to my opposition- you are totally ineffective & have been for years! 
 Our veterans are being treated worse than illegal immigrants. I will take care of our VETs.  http://someotherlink.com/
 After spending $89 million,  is at the bottom of the barrel in polls. He is ashamed to use the name "Bush" in ads. Low energy guy!
 The failing  National Review Magazine has just been informed by the Republican National Committee that they cannot participate in debate
 Highly respected Constitutional law professor Mary Brigid McManamon has just stated, "Ted Cruz is not eligible to be President." Big problem
 #TedCruz eligibility to be President not settled law, says Cruz' Constitutional Law Professor, #LaurenceTribe 
 Ted Cruz complains about my views on eminent domain, but without it we wouldn't have roads, highways, airports, schools or even pipelines.
 The late, great, William F. Buckley would be ashamed of what had happened to his prize, the dying National Review!
 Very few people read the National Review because it only knows how to criticize, but not how to lead.
 National Review is a failing publication that has lost it's way. It's circulation is way down w its influence being at an all time low. Sad!
 Thank you, Iowa! #FITN #IACaucus #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Why does  have a fired Bushy like dummy, John Sununu on- spewing false info? I will beat Hillary by a lot, she wants no part of Trump.
 #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Thank you, New Hampshire! #Trump2016 
 Thank you! #Trump2016 
 Thank you, Iowa! #Trump2016 
 Happy birthday to my friend, the great  - a totally special guy!
 New Day on CNN treats me very badly.  is a disaster. Not going to watch anymore.
 Low energy candidate  has wasted $80 million on his failed presidential campaign. Millions spent on me. He should go home and relax!
 Sad sack  has just done another ad on me, with special interest money, saying I won't beat Hillary - I WILL. But he can't beat me.
 So sad that  and many others refused to show the massive crowd at the arena yesterday in Oklahoma. Dishonest reporting!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 UNIFYING THE NATION Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Wacko  is a sad answer to the  endorsement that Cruz so desperately wanted. Glenn is a failing, crying, lost soul!
 New CNN/WMUR New Hampshire poll just released. Thank you! #FITN #Trump2016 
 Bob Dole Warns of ‘Cataclysmic’ Losses With Ted Cruz, and Says Donald Trump Would Do Better via New York Times: 
 Thank you, New Hampshire! #FITN #Trump2016 #NHPolitics 
 Thank you, Florida! #Trump2016 
 15K in OK! Had to turn away 5k, but we are coming back soon to take care of them! So much love in the crowd! Thanks! 
 Great rally in Iowa! Such wonderful people. Traveling now with  to Tulsa- massive crowd expected! 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 LIFE CHANGING EXPERIENCE Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 I am greatly honored to receive Sarah Palin's endorsement tonight.  Video:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Judge Jeanine Slams GOP Establishment: 
 #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #ECONOMY - VIDEO:  http://someotherlink.com/
 “Palin’s brand among evangelicals is as gold as the faucets in Trump tower,” said Ralph Reed, the chairman of the Faith & Freedom Coalition.
 Wow, the highly respected Governor of Iowa just stated that "Ted Cruz must be defeated." Big shoker! People do not like Ted.
 A true honor to receive the endorsement of John Wayne's daughter....read:  http://someotherlink.com/
 In the just released SC poll I increased my lead by 4 points since last poll by same firm. Up by 14! Cruz dropped 3. 
 Thank you for your strong testimony when welcoming me to Liberty University, yesterday-  
 Thank you Georgia! I appreciate all of your support. #Trump2016 
 . Just read your complete statement. You are an amazing guy & I really appreciate your words & support. I will see you soon!
 On my way to Iowa- just received new national poll numbers. Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Really disgusting that the failing New York Times allows dishonest writers to totally fabricate stories.
 Dope Frank Bruni said I called many people, including Karl Rove, losers-true! I never called my friend  a loser- he’s a winner!
 . Conflicting Stances on Birthright Citizenship [14th Amendment] Gives #TeamTrump credit. 
 Wow, new polls just out have Trump up and Cruz down - he is a nervous wreck!
 . great job on  Thank you for the very smart and kind words!
 I don't think Ted Cruz can even run for President until he can assure Republican voters that being born in Canada is not a problem. Doubt!
 Ted Cruz is falling in the polls. He is nervous. People are worried about his place of birth and his failure to report his loans from banks!
 I loved being at Liberty University today! Record setting crowd, unbelievable people! Thank you Jerry and Becki! 
 We launched a new series of #Trump2016 videos via Facebook. A new topic everyday! Watch:  http://someotherlink.com/
 A great morning with everyone  Thank you! Off to New Hampshire now. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Leaving for Liberty University. I'll be speaking today in front of a record crowd. #Trump2016
 Just a reminder that Ted Cruz supported liberal Justice John Roberts who gave us #Obamacare. 
 Thank you  for the kind words. I am very proud of the role model you are for so many. NH & IA radio ad: 
 I am self-funding my campaign - putting up my own money, not controlled.  Cruz is spending $millions on ads paid for by his N.Y. bosses.
 Far more killed than anticipated in radical Islamic terror attack yesterday. Get tough and smart U.S., or we won't have a country anymore!
 Big announcement in Ames, Iowa on Tuesday! You will not want to miss this rally! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Iran is going to buy 114 jetliners with a small part of the $150 billion we are giving them...but they won't buy from U.S., rather Airbus!
 In Iran deal we get 4 prisoners. They get $150 billion, 7 most wanted and many off watch list. This will create great incentive for others!
 Interesting read from Peggy Noonan. 
 Is this the New York that Ted Cruz is talking about & demeaning? 
 Wow! Ted Cruz received $487K in campaign contributions, $11M from a NY hedge fund mogul, & $1M low int. loan from Goldman Sachs. Hypocrite
 Departing NH now- great morning with record crowd in Portsmouth- in a snow storm! Thank you!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Greatly dishonest of  to file a financial disclosure form & not list his lending banks- then pretend he is going to clean up Wall St
 When will  give all the New York based campaign contributions back to the special interests that control him.
 Everybody that loves the people of New York, and all they have been thru, should get hypocrites like Ted Cruz out of politics!
 If Ted Cruz is so opposed to gay marriage, why did he accept money from people who espouse gay marriage?
 Ted is the ultimate hypocrite. Says one thing for money, does another for votes. 
 Great new numbers. Thank you!  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Ted Cruz purposely, and illegally, did not list on his personal disclosure form personally guaranteed loans from banks. They own him!
 Based on the fact that Ted Cruz was born in Canada and is therefore a "natural born Canadian," did he borrow unreported loans from C banks?
 Oh no, just reported that Ted Cruz didn't report another loan, this one from Citi. Wow, no wonder banks do so well in the U.S. Senate.
 The Ted Cruz wiseguy apology to the people of New York is a disgrace. Remember, his wife's employer, and his lender, is located there!
 Was there another loan that Ted Cruz FORGOT to file. Goldman Sachs owns him, he will do anything they demand. Not much of a reformer!
 Ted Cruz said he "didn't know" that he was a Canadian Citizen. He also FORGOT to file his Goldman Sachs Million $ loan papers.Not believable
 Ted Cruz was born in Canada and was a Canadian citizen until 15 months ago. Lawsuits have just been filed with more to follow. I told you so
 More radical Islam attacks today - it never ends! Strengthen the borders, we must be vigilant and smart. No more being politically correct.
 . is a total clown. Has zero credibility!    
 . please explain to the very dumb and failing  that I supported John McCain big league in 2008, not Obama!
 Just got back from Iowa - had a great time with amazing people. Will be back soon!
 .  Thank you Geraldo for your nice words on  tonight. You are a true champion! Thank  - great guy!
 Jusr watched  #HarveyPitt on  - he was great!
 Top searched candidate by state, as seen in the #GOPDebate media filing center. WE WILL MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! 
 Sen. Lindsey Graham embarrassed himself with his failed run for President and now further embarrasses himself with endorsement of Bush.
 Jeb Bush, who did poorly last night in the debate and whose chances of winning are zero, just got Graham endorsement. Graham quit at O.
 WSJ/NBC Poll: Donald Trump Widens His Lead in Republican Presidential Race. #Trump2016 
 Do you think Iran would have acted so tough if they were Russian sailors? Our country was humiliated.
 . "Trump's appeal to evangelicals is real" #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 United States looks more and more like a paper tiger. Won't be that way if I win!
 Iran humiliated the United States with the capture of our 10 sailors. Horrible pictures & images. We are weak. I will NOT forget!
 Stuart Stevens is a dumb guy who fails  virtually everything he touches. Romney campaign,his book,etc. Why does  put him on?
 Why does  &  waste airtime by putting failed campaign strategist, Stuart Stevens - who lost BIG for Romney - on the show?
 . unbelievable job on #FoxNews with  That was better than I could do! #Trump2016
 THANK YOU! #VoteTrump 
 THANK YOU, IOWA! Highly respected   poll just released. #VoteTrump #IowaCaucus 
 Thank you! #VoteTrump 
 My nomination would increase voter turnout. #VoteTrump  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Sadly, there is no way that Ted Cruz can continue running in the Republican Primary unless he can erase doubt on eligibility. Dems will sue!
 Thank you for your support last night, Iowa! #VoteTrump #Trump2016 #IACaucus #FITN #IAPolitics 
 Iran toys with U.S. days before we pay them, ridiculously, billions of dollars. Don't release money. We want our hostages back NOW!
 Numerous polls have me beating Hillary Clinton. In a race with her, voter turnout will be the highest in U.S. history-I get most new voters!
 The State Of The Union speech was one of the most boring, rambling and non-substantive I have heard in a long time. New leadership fast!
 Just found out that  is spending a fortune on Iowa push polls negative to me. Not nice, but OK! New polls are great.
 The #SOTU speech is really boring, slow, lethargic - very hard to watch!
 The Iran deal is terrible. Why didn't we get the uranium stockpile - it was sent to Russia. #SOTU
 New CBS poll. #Trump2016 
 Another new Iowa poll just released. Thank you! #IACaucus #FITN 
 Such a serious problem for Ted & the GOP. Great doubt, Dems will sue! Let's all work together to solve this problem. 
 On my way to Cedar Falls, Iowa, now. Will be great--I love the people of Iowa!
 THANK YOU! #Trump2016 
 The Tonight Show begins in 5 minutes. Enjoy!
 . horrible advise to Mitt Romney made victory an impossibility. Don't blame Mitt! Now Stevens can't get a job!
 Fantastic job on   tonight.  is a winner! 
 Don't forget to watch The Tonight Show with the wonderful  at 11:30 P.M. You will not be disappointed!  
 Face The Nation's interview of me was the highest rated show that they have had in 15 years. Congratulations and WOW!   
 . Major Garrett of  covers me very inaccurately. Total agenda, bad reporter!
 Thank you Michael Harrison  for your kind words - greatly appreciated!
 Will be on  with  on  at 11:35pmE. Enjoy! #Trump2016 
 . recently said that she can’t be wooed by Trump. She is so average in every way, who the hell wants to woo her!
 New Iowa poll. Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 . is retiring their elephants-- the circus will never be the same.
 Congratulations to  of Face the Nation on his highest ratings in 15 years. 4.6 million people watched my interview! Thank you!
 Just arrived in New Hampshire. Thank you to all of my supporters! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 So professional of  news to throw out the failing  newspaper from their debate. Paper won't survive, highly unethical!
 Great job on Fox this morning  I am sending out for your book immediately. Thank you very much!
 Congratulations to my friend  on winning a #GoldenGlobe. A wonderful guy- who has created something special- well deserved!
 Why does  w/  allow a hater & racist like  to waste good airtime?  can do much better than him!
 Thank you to our law enforcement officers! #LESM #Trump2016 
 Union Leader refuses to comment as to why they were kicked out of the ABC News debate like a dog. For starters, try getting a new publisher!
 UL has lost all credibility under Joe McQuaid w circulation dropping to record lows. They aren't worthy of representing the great people NH.
 This is really unfair and a conflict for all the other candidates. I said it should not be allowed and ABC agreed.
 If their highly unethical behavior, including begging me for ads, isn’t questionable enough, they have endorsed a candidate who can’t win.
 I am pleased to announce that I had the Union Leader removed from the upcoming debate. 
 Remember, get TIME magazine! I am on the cover. Take it out in 4 years and read it again! Just watch...
 Heading now for Reno, Nevada, for a big rally. Good poll numberd all over!
 In the just out  Poll, I easily beat Hillary Clinton - and I havn't even focused on her yet. On our way: MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Yesterday in Iowa was amazing - two speeches in front of two great sold out crowds. They love that I am the only candidate self-funding!
 I want to thank the people of Iowa for an unbelievable day. The crowds were amazing. Will be back Tuesday!
 Will be on Meet the Press with  tomorrow morning. Enjoy!
 I will be interviewed by Chris Wallace on Fox tomorrow morning. Tune in!
 I'm protesting the  from having anything to do w/ ABC debate. Their unethical record doesn't give them the right to be involved!
 (2/2) David brilliantly tells it like it is -- the real deal! Read it! 
 (1/2) Time Magazine has me on the cover this week. David Von Drehle has written one of the best stories I have ever had.
 Thank you so much. Earnest must have been a great person.  http://someotherlink.com/
 . watched on  and appreciate your statements --- I have been waiting for them for a long time. Thank you.
 Thank you,  Chris Cillizza. It is a true person of character that can change his opinion & do what is right. 
 Constitutional law expert  #Laurence Tribe of Harvard says "wrong to say it (natural born citizen) is a settled matter-it isn't settled).
 South Carolina rally last night was so unbelievably exciting (and fun). I am now off to Iowa for two big rallies - packed houses. Love it!
 Pat Buchanan gave a fantastic interview this morning on  - way to go Pat, way ahead of your time!
 Great even in SC tonight! Fire Marshall would not let everyone in-- 5,000 turned away. Thank you for coming!
 Will be at venue, in wonderful South Carolina, very soon. Big traffic back-up, tremendous crowd! Will be wild.
 #FoxNews Poll - THANK YOU! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Love seeing union & non-union members alike are defecting to Trump. I will create jobs like no one else. Their #Dem leaders can’t compete!
 I hope all workers demand that their  reps endorse Donald J. Trump. Nobody knows jobs like I do! Don’t let them sell you out!
 On my way to South Carolina. Big Crowd--- look forward to it!
 Not good news for Jeb Bush 
 Hank Greenberg, formerly of AIG, gave $10 million to the  campaign 3 months ago. He is not happy, a total waste of money!
 Great time in Burlington, Vermont. Crowd was amazing.
 We could only get a small fraction of this 25k crowd in. The movement to Make America Great Again is unbelievable! 
 I'm leaving now for Burlington, Vermont. It will be wild!
 Joy Behar, who was fired from her last show for lack of ratings, is even worse on  We love Barbara!
 The   once great when headed by  is now in total freefall. Whoopi Goldberg is terrible. Very sad!
 Hillary and her friends! 
 Weak & ineffective  is doing ads where he shows his statement in the debate but not my response. False advertising!
 I have an idea for  whose campaign is a disaster. Try using your last name and don't be ashamed of it!
 . Ted--free legal advice on how to pre-empt the Dems on citizen issue. Go to court now & seek Declaratory Judgment--you will win!
 Massive crowd in VT tonight. Venue not big enough. Officials say NO to outside event and sound system. Arrive early!
 Man shot inside Paris police station. Just announced that terror threat is at highest level. Germany is a total mess-big crime. GET SMART!
 I will be in beautiful Burlington, Vermont, tonight for a rally. Will be great fun. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 It was a very wise move that Ted Cruz renounced his Canadian citizenship 18 months ago. Senator John McCain is certainly no friend of Ted!
 . was one of the worst performing stocks on the S&P last year, plunging 46%. Very disloyal company. Another win for Trump! Boycott.
 The failing  newspaper in N.H. just sent The Trump Organization a letter asking that we take ads. How stupid, how desperate!
 Do you believe that  in NH was demanding ads? Look at enclosed letter from them, just received: 
 I will be on  for a  interview today. Please join us 5PM ET.
 Huge crowd expected tomorrow night! VT Police say first come, first serve. Arrive early!
 Don’t like  golf swing.  Not athletic. I’ve won many club championships. Play him for charity!
 I don’t cheat at golf but  cheats—with his game he has no choice—and stop doing commercials!
 HAPPY BIRTHDAY to my son,  Very proud of you!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Germany is going through massive attacks to its people  by the migrants allowed to enter the country. New Years Eve was a disaster. THINK!
 I am in New Hampshire. Just received great news from Reuters poll. Thank you for your support! 
 I don’t know  to best of my knowledge haven't played golf w/him & think he does too many TV commercials—boring. Not a fan.
 Wow  circulation in NH has dropped from 75,000 to around 10—bad management. No wonder they begged me for ads.
 The rally in Lowell, Massachusetts, was amazing. 10,000 people going wild. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Woody Johnson, owner of the NYJets, is  finance chairman. If Woody would’ve been w/me, he would’ve been in the playoffs, at least!
 I look forward to being in Lowell, Massachusetts, today. I hear a very big crowd is expected--we will have lots of fun!
 By the way, Hillary & the MSM forgot to mention that Hillary is in the  Al-Shabaab terror video. 
 The worst thing Hillary could do is have her husband campaign for her. Just watch.
 Iran, with all of the money and all else given to them by Obama, has wanted a way to take over Saudi Arabia & their oil. THEY JUST FOUND IT!
 . of the  was terrible today on Face The Nation.No focus, poor level of concentration-but correct on Hillary lying
 . said today on  that "attacking Bill to get to Hillary has never worked before." Wrong - attacked him in '08 & won!
 Does anybody remember when Bill Clinton, in 2008, worked long and hard for Hillary? She LOST! Now Bill is at it again. Just watch.
 Thank you for your support in Biloxi, MS! Let's ALL get out & VOTE in 2016, so we can #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Hillary said that guns don't keep you safe. If she really believes that she should demand that her heavily armed bodyguards quickly disarm!
 Al-Shabbab, not ISIS, just made a video on me - they all will as front-runner & if I speak out against them, which I must. Hillary lied!
 Hillary Clinton lied last week when she said ISIS made a D.T. video. The video that ISIS made was about her husband being a degenerate.
 Just returned from Mississippi - a great evening.
 Thank you #Biloxi, #Mississippi! Remember this night & spread the word to get out & #VoteTrump2016! 
 Just arrived in Mississippi for the rally. Word is that the crowd is overflowing and massive. Will be an amazing evening!
 Heading to Biloxi, Mississippi. Massive crowds expected. Thank you for your support! #VoteTrump2016 
 Remember, I am self-funding my campaign, the only one in either party. I'm not controlled by lobbyists or special interests-only the U.S.A.!
 When I look at all of the money the special interests and lobbyists are giving to candidates, beware - the candidates are mere puppets $$$$!
 I hope Bill Clinton starts talking about women's issues so that voters can see what a hypocrite he is and how Hillary abused those women!
 Hillary Clinton doesn't have the strength or stamina to be president. Jeb Bush is a low energy individual, but Hillary is not much better!
 Hillary Clinton said that it is O.K. to ban Muslims from Israel by building a WALL, but not O.K. to do so in the U.S. We must be vigilant!
 . is a low energy "stiff" who should focus his special interest money on the many people ahead of him in the polls. Has no chance!
 . is a sad case. A total embarrassment to both himself and his family, he just announced he will continue to spend on Trump hit ads!
 Massive crowds expected in Mississippi tomorrow night. Look forward to it! 2015 IN PHOTOS:  http://someotherlink.com/
 #VoteTrump2016 & together we will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! THANK YOU for your support! 
 Thank you so much to  for naming me the 2015 Man of the Year. This is indeed a great honor for me!
 The person that Hillary Clinton least wants to run against is, by far, me. It will be the largest voter turnout ever - she will be swamped!
 I will be going to Mississippi tomorrow night - hear the crowds are going to be massive! Look forward to it.
 Well, the year has officially begun. I have many stops planned and will be working very hard to win so that we can turn our country around!
 Happy New Year from #MarALago! Thank you to my great family for all of their support. 
 #HappyNewYearAmerica! 
 HAPPY NEW YEAR & THANK YOU!  http://someotherlink.com/
 I will be on  live,  with members of my family, at 11:50 P.M. We will ring in the New Year together! MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I would like to wish everyone A HAPPY AND HEALTHY NEW YEAR. WE MUST ALL WORK TOGETHER TO, FINALLY, MAKE AMERICA SAFE AGAIN AND GREAT AGAIN!
 Do you believe that The State Department, on NEW YEAR'S EVE, just released more of Hillary's e-mails. They just want it all to end. BAD!
 THANK YOU ILLINOIS! Let's not forget to get family & friends- out to VOTE IN 2016!  http://someotherlink.com/
 HAPPY BIRTHDAY to my son,  Very proud of you! #TBT  http://someotherlink.com/
 I would feel sorry for  and how badly he is doing with his campaign other than for the fact he took millions of $'s of hit ads on me
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 People ask, "why do you tweet and re-tweet to millions about  when he is so low in the polls?" Because of his big $ hit ads on me!
 . has spent  $63,000,000 and is at the bottom of the polls. I have spent almost nothing and am at the top. WIN!  
 A GREAT day in South Carolina. Record crowd and fantastic enthusiasm. This is now a movement to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I predict that dying  newspaper, which has been run into the ground by publisher "Stinky" Joe McQuaid, will be dead in 2 years!
 A lovely letter from the daughter of the late great John Wayne. Our country could use a John Wayne right now. 
 Great poll- thank you Nevada! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I'm going to be live with  and  to ring in the New Year 2016. Everybody should tune in to  tomorrow night!
 Thank you Hilton Head, South Carolina! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you Hilton Head, South Carolina!  #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 I never thought I'd be saying this but I've really enjoyed   on television lately, and he was terrific hosting 
 Joe McQuaid ( is desperately trying to sell the  It's a loser, and my comments haven't helped him much.
 The dying  newspaper in NH is in turmoil over my comments about them- like a bully that got knocked out!
 Iowa was fantastic last night, amazing crowd and people. I'm now in Florida, getting ready to go to South Carolina. Big crowd, very exciting
 .   You were great on  last night. Thanks for the nice words. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 THANK YOU Council Bluffs, Iowa! The silent majority, is silent no more! #Trump2016 #FITN  http://someotherlink.com/
 Joe McQuaid ( of the dying Union Leader wanted ads, lunches, donations, speeches from me, and tweets---very unethical.
 The great people of New Hampshire, who I love, are not properly served by the dying Union Leader newspaper.
 Shows how dumb Joe McQuaid ( of the dying Union Leader is to put out the letter I wrote saying why I didn't do his failed debate!
 New #ReutersPoll. Thank you America!  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I hope  does better for Rubio than he did at the #Benghazi hearings, which were a total disaster for Republicans & America!
 We need a real President! 
 Looking forward to being in Council Bluffs, Iowa, later today. Despite weather, rally is on -- will be fantastic! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 So, I have spent almost nothing on my run for president and am in 1st place. Jeb Bush has spent $59 million & done. Run country my way!
 My campaign for president is $35,000,000 under budget, I have spent very little (and am in 1st place).Now I will spend big in Iowa/N.H./S.C.
 I will be interviewed on the  at 7:00 A.M. Talking about the state of the race for president, and more. Enjoy!
 . is terrific at hosting on  - he really gets it!
 Remember that Bill Clinton was brought in to help Hillary against Obama in 2008. He was terrible, failed badly, and was called a racist!
 Thank you- Nashua, New Hampshire! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  #NHPolitics #FITN  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you to a #Trump2016 supporter for this video of my campaign- over the past 6 months. Video: 
 Strange, but I see wacko Bernie Sanders allies coming over to me because I'm lowering taxes, while he will double & triple them, a disaster!
 Wages in are country are too low, good jobs are too few,  and people have lost faith in our leaders.We need smart and strong leadership now!
 Many of the great jobs that the people of our country want are long gone, shipped to other countries. We now are part time, sad! I WILL FIX!
 The middle-class has worked so hard, are not getting the kind of jobs that they have long dreamed of - and no  effective raise in years. BAD
 If Hillary thinks she can unleash her husband, with his terrible record of women abuse, while playing the women's card on me, she's wrong!
 Hopefully the Republican National Committee can straighten out the total mess that is taking place in Virginia's Republican Party. FAST!
 Straighten out The Republican Party of Virginia before it is too late. Stupid!  RNC
 . blew his campaign when he gave Hillary a pass on her e-mail crime, said that I feel wages in America are too high. Lie!
 Why are  flunkies   and  two of the dumbest people in politics, always on the  panels..and yet Poll:Trump 39
 The voters the Republican Party of Virginia are excluding will doom any chance of victory. The Dems LOVE IT! Be smart and win for a change!
 R.P.Virginia has lost statewide 7 times in a row. Will now not allow desperately needed new voters. Suicidal mistake. RNC MUST ACT NOW!
 It begins, Republican Party of Virginia, controlled by the RNC, is working hard to disallow independent, unaffiliated and new voters. BAD!
 I will be interviewed on  at 8:00. Will be talking about Hillary and far more interesting subjects. Enjoy!
 I will do far more for women than Hillary, and I will keep our country safe, something which she will not be able to do-no strength/stamina!
 Thank you! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Hillary Clinton has announced that she is letting her husband out to campaign but HE'S DEMONSTRATED A PENCHANT FOR SEXISM, so inappropriate!
 A new terror warning was issued for European cties. At what point do we say we have had enough and get really tough and smart. Weak leaders!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  Story:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Criminal deportations in the U.S. are the lowest number in many years. We are letting criminals knowingly stay in our country. MUST CHANGE!
 The Phoenix V.A., it has just been reported, is in worse shape than ever before. The wait is horrendous, and people are dying. I will fix it
 The same people that said I wouldn't run, or that I wouldn't lead or do well (1st place and leading by 21%), now say I won't beat Hillary.
 . is so dishonest in his reporting...and to think he was going off the air until I came along-no ratings. I will beat Hillary!
  just announced that TRUMP was #1 story of 2015. Totally meaningless, however, if we don't WIN IT ALL and Make America Great Again!
 When will the Democrats, and Hillary in particular, say "we must build a wall, a great wall, and Mexico is going to pay for it?" Never!
 Our great VETERANS are being treated very badly because of corruption and incompetence at the V.A. That will stop, I will fix this quickly!
 Remember when failed candidate  said that illegals came across the border as AN ACT OF LOVE? He's spent $59 million and is at 3%.
 We have many problems in our house (country!), and we need to fix them before we let visitors come over and stay. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Does everyone see that the Democrats and President Obama are now, because of me, starting to deport people who are here illegally. Politics!
 . was GREAT today on   She gets what is going on in politics, and sees it very clearly. Have her on more!
 Merry Christmas to all. Have a great day and have a really amazing year. Together, we will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! It will be done!
 .  Great job on  today. Very wise indeed!
 . Why didn't you report Hillary lying about the ISIS video. Bad reporting. Perhaps  will do better next year-but doubt it!
 I am now in Palm Beach, Florida, and will be going to church tonight. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 . and  very dishonest in not showing the new  Poll where I am at 39%, 21points higher than Cruz. Be honest Chuck!
 Why isn't  using the much newer  Poll when discussing how well I am doing instead of the older Q Poll? CNN even better!
 Wow, because of the pressure put on by me, ICE TO LAUNCH LARGE SCALE DEPORTATION RAIDS. It's about time!
 Next year will be an interesting one. I look forward to running against Hillary Clinton, a totally flawed candidate, and beating her soundly
 Third rate reporters Amy Chozick and Maggie Haberman of the failing  are totally in the Hillary circle of bias. Think about Bill!
 Wow, even lowly Rand Paul has just past  in the new  Poll. Jeb is at 3%, I'm at 39%. Stop throwing your money down the drain!
 In the ridiculous  ad about me, Jeb is speaking to me during the debate, but doesn't allow my answer, which destroys him - SO SAD!
 Poor  spent $50 million on his campaign, I spent almost nothing. He's bottom (and gone), I'm top (by a lot). That's what U.S. needs!
 A great Christmas movie & perfect #TBT! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  Story:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Hillary said "I really deplore the tone and inflammatory rhetoric of his campaign." I deplore the death and destruction she caused-stupidity
 Merry Christmas & Happy Holidays! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Hillary, when you complain about "a penchant for sexism," who are you referring to. I have great respect for women. BE CAREFUL!
 It is hard to believe I am winning by so much when I am treated so badly by the media.  New  Poll amazing in ALL categories. 21 pt. Lead
 Why does  give  so much airtime. He (and other Fox pundits) is so biased. Still thinks Romney won. Unfair coverage of Trump
 . treats me so badly. Using old Quinnipiac Poll where I have a much smaller lead than the just out  Poll. All negative!
 The  which is the lobbyist (power) for not imposing taxes on #Amazon, today did a nasty cartoon attacking  kids. Bad
 The silent majority- is silent no more! Remember the importance of VOTING! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 The Hillary Clinton staged event yesterday was pathetic. Be careful Hillary as you play the war on women or women being degraded card.
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you America! Together- we will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Big news just out - NEW  POLL  TRUMP  39 and leads in every major category. Likeability way up. CRUZ 18  CARSON 10  RUBIO 10
 We need a PRESIDENT with strength, stamina, heart and incredible deal making skill if our country is ever going to be able to prosper again!
 It is a shame that the biased media is able to so incorrectly define a word for the public when they know that the definition is wrong. Sad!
 When I said that Hillary Clinton got schlonged by Obama, it meant got beaten badly. The media knows this. Often used word in politics!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Wow, new Reuters Poll just out. Big lead if you want to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!  TRUMP 37  CRUZ 11 This is at the top of Drudge!
 For those on TV defending my use of the word "schlonged," bc #MSM is giving it false meaning-tell them it means beaten badly. Dishonest #MSM
 NPR's  said "schlonged" to WaPo re: 1984 Mondale/Ferraro campaign: "That ticket went on to get schlonged at the polls." #Hypocrisy
 Once again, #MSM is dishonest. "Schlonged" is not vulgar. When I said Hillary got "schlonged" that meant beaten badly.
 Jeb's big ad buy against me, paid for by lobbyists, shows my face but doesn't have me answering Jeb's statements. He is really pathetic!
 Watching  and consider  to be one of the least talented people on television. Boring and biased!
 Women defy media narrative, love Trump at packed Michigan rally. VIDEO:  http://someotherlink.com/
 . opening and closing in the debate were said by all to be terrible--fumbled around, incoherent.
 Why doesn't  in his ads, show my answer to his statement in the debate?
 Will  in his phony advertising campaign, show himself asking me to apologize to his wife in the debate?
 . just took millions of $'s in special interest money to look like a tough guy. Will never work!
 Weak and low energy  whose campaign is a disaster, is now doing ads against me where he tries to look like a tough guy.
 Video from Michigan last night. After asking for months, the media panned their cameras!  http://someotherlink.com/
 THANK YOU America!  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you - Michigan! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you - New Hampshire! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 THANK YOU Grand Rapids, Michigan! Time to end political correctness & secure our homeland!  http://someotherlink.com/
  thanks for your support- it is very much appreciated!
 Getting ready to leave for Michigan - will be an amazing evening! See you there.
 Do you think that Hillary Clinton will apologize to me for the lie she told about "the video" of me being used by ISIS. There is no video.
 Thanks  for all of your kind words and thoughts. Big progress is being made. Keep up the great work!
 A suicide bomber has just killed U.S. troops in Afghanistan. When will our leaders get tough and smart. We are being led to slaughter!
 It's the Democrats' total weakness & incompetence that gave rise to ISIS --  not a tape of Donald Trump that was an admitted Hillary lie!
 Phyllis Schlafly: Trump is 'last hope for America'  http://someotherlink.com/
 Getting ready to go to the great State of Michigan. Big crowd tonight. Make America Great Again!
 Just out: TRUMP GOP DEBATE - 18,000,000. CLINTON DEMOCRAT DEBATE - 6,700,000. And they were on major network vs. cable!
 Hillary said with respect to ISIS, "we are finally where we need to be." Do we want 4  more years of incompetent leadership?  MAGA!
 I demand an apology from Hillary Clinton for the disgusting story she made up about me for purposes of the debate. There never was a video.
 Hillary said at debate ISIS is "going to people showing videos in order to recruit more radical jihadistst." She made up story-want apology!
 Very sad what happened last night at the Miss Universe Pageant. I sold it 6 months ago for a record price. This would never have happened!
 . today said he didn't want to be the front-runner, he would rather be where he is now, 2%. That is the talk of a loser, can't win!
 Great poll out of Illinois! Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 . final 3 on now. Great people, great new owner  WATCH.
 My friend,  of  bought the Miss Universe pageants from me and they are on tonight on #Fox! Tune in!
 It was really strange when Hillary was missing from the podium last night. Not very presidential!
 Hillary Clinton spokesperson admitted that their was no ISIS video of me. Therefore, Hillary LIED at the debate last night. SAD!
 . was terrible on Face The Nation today. Being at 2% and falling seems to have totally affected his confidence. A basket case!
 We need a #POTUS with great strength & stamina. Hillary does not have that. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Will be on MediaBuzz on   at 11:00 A.M.
 Will be on  this morning. Check times.   
 Will be interviewed by  on   This Week at 10:00 A.M. Eastern. A beauty!
 Hillary Clinton lied when she said that "ISIS is using video of Donald Trump as a recruiting tool." This was fact checked by  FALSE
 . was totally misled, and he fell for it, that Hillary wants to run against me. She knows that I am her worst nightmare-Jon doesn't!
 . stupidly believes that Hillary wants to run against me because she said so. She says that so people believe it - opposite!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you America!  post-debate poll with +/- from previous poll. #VoteTrump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Thank you Cedar Rapids, Iowa! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  http://someotherlink.com/
 President Obama spends so much time speaking of the so-called Carbon footprint, and yet he flies all the way to Hawaii on a massive old 747.
 See, Sanders backed Hillary on E-mails at the debate, hurting himself, and then she threw him under the bus (but failed). Disloyal person!
 Another new post-debate poll.  THANK YOU! #VoteTrump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Thank you for all of your support! Most importantly - we need to get everyone out to VOTE! #VoteTrump2016 
 The last thing our country needs is another BUSH! Dumb as a rock!
 . has embarrassed himself & his family with his incompetent campaign for President. He should remain true to himself.
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Weak & ineffective  is doing ads where he shows his statement in the debate but not my response. False advertising!
 I have an idea for  whose campaign is a disaster. Try using your last name & don’t be ashamed of it!
 .  Don’t misrepresent in order to make a point. I was always tough on ISIS--as you’ll find out after I get elected.
 .  Thanks for defending me so brilliantly against  --  Always tough when they falsify.
 As I have been saying. Only the beginning: "ISIS Suspects Arrested in Turkey, 150 European Passports Seized." 
 New Reuters poll - thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 #ISIS is making $400M/year on oil. I have been saying it for years. We need to bomb the oil!  http://someotherlink.com/
 You do not want to miss  10 Most Fascinating People of 2015  • 9:30pmE.  http://someotherlink.com/
 There is no question who will handle the threat of terrorism best as #POTUS. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain I will be in Cedar Rapids,IA this Saturday. Get your tickets- 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Will be on  in 20 minutes on  #Kimmel #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 . got fired like a dog by #Fox. The Blaze is failing and he wanted to have me on his show. I said no - because he is irrelevant.
 I will be doing  tonight at 8:00pmE from Mesa, Arizona - will be talking about the #GOPDebate & more. 
 Will be on  tonight at 11:35pmE on  #Kimmel #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Clear winner of the #GOPDebate. Thank you for your support!  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Hillary Clinton is weak and ineffective - no strength, no stamina.
 Jeb Bush had a tough night at the debate. Now he'll probably take some of his special interest money, he is their puppet, and buy ad's.
 Thank you for the nice words  The debate was interesting, and fun. Keep up the great work!
 Will be interviewed on the  tonight at 8:00 P.M. Will be talking about the debate, and more!
 Bill O'Reilly calls Trump and  campaign brilliant. In first place by 27 points.
 . works so hard but just doesn't have a natural instinct for politics. Others do, and those are the people you want to follow!
 Thank you  for your nice words this morning on  It was a good night!
 Thank you, so many people have given me credit for winning the debate last night. All polls agree. It was fun and interesting!
 Thank you,  - for saying I was a winner tonight. It is my great honor. #Trump2016
 We're not talking about religion; we're talking about security. #GOPDebate 
 #GOPDebate #Trump2016 
 Departing for #GOPDebate. Let's #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Highly respected PUBLIC POLICY POLLING (PPP) just announced that I am number one in IOWA. Thank you!
 New PPP poll just released in Iowa- up 6 points from last poll. Leading w/ 28%! Don't worry - media won't report it! 
 . what an honor to read your piece. As one of the truly great intellects & my friend, I won't forget! 
 #TheRemembranceProject  http://someotherlink.com/
 . #JoeTheismann was great as a political analyst on  He knows far more than football. Thanks for the nice words Joe!
 I won every debate so far according to all debate polls including    and more. Too bad dopey  lies!
 Between Iraq war monger  dummy  deadpan  highly overrated  among others,  not fair!
 I am in Trump International Hotel, Las Vegas, getting ready and waiting for the debate tonight. Look forward -   hope I get treated fairly!
 I wonder if  and her flunkies have written their scripts yet about my debate performance tonight. No matter how well I do - bad!
 . is very bad at math. She was totally unable to figure out the difference between me and Cruz in the new Monmouth Poll 41to14.
 . the most overrated anchor at  worked hard to explain away the new Monmouth poll 41 to 14 or 27 pt lead. She said 15!
 Why isn't anyone using the  Iowa Poll with me having a big lead. They only want to use the one negative poll (2nd place).Dishonest press
 Isn't it amazing that  paid a fortune for an Iowa Poll, which shows me in first place over Cruz by 13%, 33% to 20% - then doesn't use it
 Wow, I just had two very good Iowa polls and a phenomenal just out National Poll from   - 38%.  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Thank you for your support! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 What an evening in Las Vegas, Nevada! THANK YOU for your continued support. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
  horrible defense of me against highly overrated  I will bring more people into the party & easily beat Hillary!
 Why doesn't  use the #CNN Iowa poll?  
 Thank you  Great work on  #Trump2016
 Thank you  for your nice words. They are very much appreciated. I fully understand that you really get it.
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Can't believe Major League Baseball just rejected  for the Hall of Fame. He's paid the price. So ridiculous - let him in!
 . - you were fantastic on CNN. Thank you for the nice words. See you at the #GOPDebate.
 . was great on   Thank you Pat! #Tump2016
 Thank you  Very nice! #Trump2016 
 Another great accolade for  Highly respected Golf Odyssey- awarded  Blue Monster with best redesign. Thank you!
 Record of Health:  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 EXCLUSIVE: Newt Gingrich: ‘The Country Is in Rebellion,’ Trump Can ‘Kick Down the Doors’ 
 Why doesn't  quote the new Iowa  Poll where I have a 33% to 20% lead over Ted Cruz and all others. Think about it!
 People have got to stop working to be so politically correct and focus all of their energy on finding solutions to very complex problems!
 I was disappointed that Ted Cruz would speak behind my back, get caught, and then deny it. Well, welcome to the wonderful world of politics!
 I did interview with Chris Wallace of  in order to be fair. He then puts on Rove, Lane and Will, three Trump bashers, to discuss.
 Many think that the Championship Course at Turnberry, home of The Duel In The Sun, will be the worlds best after the renovation.
 A very good NBC/Wall Street Journal Poll was just released wherein I went up from last month and am in the lead. Nice!
 .  Great job last night - very exciting! You have come a long way from those difficult early days, I am proud of you.
 People that have read it tell me that  book is terrible (and boring). Save your money!  should can him, no credibility!
 Chris Wallace  at 10:00 A.M.
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 .  at 9:00 A.M.
 . An election between Hillary and myself will be the biggest voter turnout in U.S. history. Just like the debates 24 M vs 2M.
 . Interesting article, but I will beat Hillary easily. People that have given up on the system will come out to vote for me!
 Something must be done with dopey  - he is pushing Republicans down the same old path of defeat. Don't fall for it, Karl is a loser
 I will be interviewed on   at 9:00 A.M. and Fox News Sunday with Chris Wallace at 10:O0  A.M. CNN Iowa Poll -13 point lead!
 I will be on CNN's - State of the Union tomorrow morning at 9amE.  http://someotherlink.com/
 New CNN Iowa poll --- Trump 33, Cruz 20. Everyone else way down! Don't trust Des Moines Register poll- biased towards Trump!
 Thank you General. #Trump2016 
 A great afternoon. Thank you South Carolina! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Reports say #ISIS now has a passport machine to have its believers infiltrate our country. I told you so. 
 John Podesta says nominee will be Cruz b/c last person Hillary wants to face is Trump! Use your head folks! 46-41! 
 Getting the support of  of UFC means a lot. A total winner, who has done an amazing job. Just ordered his fight to watch tonight!
 . so many people have tweeted about your amazing words to me, thank you! Heading to big crowd in South Carolina!
 Thank you! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 I will be interviewed on  at 8:00 A.M. So much to talk about!
 . did a fantastic interview with syndicated columnist Michelle Malkin. Congrats to both!
 Just got back from Iowa, great people!
 I had a great time in Des Moines, Iowa tonight! Thank you for all of the support. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 . you were great with  on  tonight.  Thank you for your kind words. We will keep Americans safe.
 Dopey Prince  wants to control our U.S. politicians with daddy’s money. Can’t do it when I get elected. #Trump2016
 Thank you  &  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Thank you! We are at 35% in new Reuters poll with #2 coming in at 12%. Time to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!#Trump2016 
 I will not let you down!  #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain  http://someotherlink.com/
 Tom Ridge is a failed 'Bushy' & PA Governor. Him & his friend  shouldn't be allowed to do their bias commentary- nobody listens!
 Tom Ridge should be focused on trying to bring the party together rather than ripping it apart w/ your faulty thought process. I will win!
 Never get good #'s from failing Des Moines Register/Bloomberg. I think something's going on w/them. Up 13 in IA according to respected CNN.
 Great news in Georgia!  The just out  Landmark poll shows me in first with 43%! Wow.  http://someotherlink.com/
 Our spectacular ballroom under construction at the great Turnberry resort in Scotland. 
 . is a nice guy , but just hopeless. He knows so little about politics and, in particular, winning!  I fixed his rating problem.
 . just went off the rails. I will beat Hillary easily - she does not want to run against me. I am tuning them out, waste of time
 . should not make statements behind closed doors to his bosses, he should bring them out into the open - more fun that way!
 Looks like  is getting ready to attack. I am leading by so much he must. I hope so, he will fall like all others. Will be easy!
 . is so off on Iowa, which I am leading big in new  poll. I will win Iowa. Also, I beat Hillary easily!
 Great evening last night in  New Hampshire. Got the endorsement from the New England Police Union - big  territory, great people! Thank you.
 . was not good tonight on  He just doesn't know about winning! But he is a nice guy.
 Respected Morning Consult poll just out. I lead all Republicans and beat Hillary head to head by a wide margin- 45 to 40!
 In Britain, more Muslims join ISIS than join the British army. 
 Thank you to  I have always appreciated your courage, but now more so than ever!
 An honor to be endorsed by the New England Police Benevolent Association. Thank you!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Establishment flunky  is going crazy with the just released CBS poll that has me way ahead. New Fox poll has me beating Hillary.
 Dummy  continues to make and write false statements. He still thinks Romney won--he should get a life!
 Thank you for your support! Being #PoliticallyCorrect will NOT #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!  http://someotherlink.com/
 I am signing copies of my book CRIPPLED AMERICA. Order yours now--makes a great holiday gift!  … …
 The politicians of the U.K. should watch Katie Hopkins of Daily  on  Many people in the U.K. agree with me!
 Thank you to respected columnist Katie Hopkins of Daily  for her  powerful writing on the U.K.'s Muslim problems.
 The United Kingdom is trying hard to disguise their massive  Muslim problem. Everybody is wise to what is happening, very sad! Be honest.
 I have decided to postpone my trip to Israel and to schedule my meeting with  at a later date after I become President of the U.S.
 Our VISA system is broken, like so much else in our country. We better get it fixed really fast. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I will be interviewed on  this morning at 7:30. So much to talk about!
 Wow, my poll numbers have just been announced and have gone through the roof!
 . spent a big part of her show talking about other shows spending so much time on me. Really weird, she's being driven crazy!
 Weak and totally conflicted people like  shouldn't be allowed on television unless given an I.Q. test. Dumb as a rock!  
 Great interview tonight  - very professionally done. 
 Thank you  for your wonderful editorial as to why I should have been  Magazine's Person of the Year. You should run Time!
 Great leaders listen to and support law enforcement officials. Police discuss no-go areas:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Why does  bore their audience with people like  a totally biased loser who doesn't have a clue. I hear she will soon be gone!
 . who can't believe that her candidate has bombed so badly, is one of the dumber pundits on T.V. Hard to watch, zero talent! 
 . on  at 10:00 P.M.
 Thank you for all of your support, South Carolina! #Trump2016 
 I am interviewed on the   tonight at 8:00. Then at 10:00, I am interviewed by  on  Enjoy!
 The police in London say I’m right. Major article in Daily Mail. “We can’t wear uniform in our own cars.” 
 Thank you  you finally get it! 
 Thank you, Piers, they don't know what they're getting into. 
 . of Philadelphia, who is doing a terrible job, should be ashamed for using such a disgusting word in referring to me.Low life!
 I am signing copies of my book CRIPPLED AMERICA. Makes a great holiday gift. Order yours now!  … …
 I told you  Magazine would never pick me as person of the year despite being the big favorite They picked person who is ruining Germany
 Hillary Clinton does not have the STRENGTH or STAMINA to be President. We need strong and super smart for our next leader - or trouble!
 The last person corrupt Hillary Clinton wants to run against is Donald J. Trump. I'll end up beating her in every state. New Fox Poll-Trump!
 The failing  does not mention the new  Poll that has me leading Iowa by a massive 13 points - I am at 33%. Maggie Haberman, sad!
 Great poll numbers just coming out of New Hampshire. BIG lead for "Trump" according to 
 Wow, what a day. So many foolish people that refuse to acknowledge the tremendous  danger and uncertainty of certain people coming into U.S.
 Our country is facing a major threat from radical Islamic terrorism. We better get very smart, and very tough, FAST, before it is too late!
 Despite my great respect for King Abdullah II, I will not be visiting Jordan at this time. This is in response to the false  report.
 Prior to the end of the year, I will be traveling to Israel. I am very much looking forward to it.
 Great new poll from NH. Thank you! We need to keep this country safe! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Will be on  News tonight at 6:30. Interviewed by the legendary  Enjoy
 The legendary  will be asking me questions about the Presidential campaign on  at 6:30 PM.
 A very big poll is coming out at 6 PM in New Hampshire. Will be very interested in the results.
 A new poll indicates that 68% of my supporters would vote for me if I departed the GOP & ran as an independent. 
 I am signing copies of my book CRIPPLED AMERICA. Order yours now--makes a great holiday gift!  …
 I wish the  Wall Street Journal had reported the just out  Iowa Poll correctly. I lead by a wide margin,13 points, going up big!
 Just won IOWA  Poll BIG: Trump 33% Cruz 20% Rubio 11%,  but  reported "Cruz momentum" but nothing about the fact that I easily won!
 Thank you for the support, South Carolina! #USSYorktown  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Great video of tonights crowd reacting to my latest proposal in SC. #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Just released  Poll gives me a big 13 point lead in Iowa. Change your false story failing  Thank you Iowa!
 The main stream media wants to surrender constitutional rights -- I believe #ISIS needs to surrender!
 On my way to Charleston/Mount Pleasant, South Carolina. Big crowd. Look forward to it! #USSYorktown 
 Statement on Preventing Muslim Immigration:  http://someotherlink.com/
 Just put out a very important policy statement on the extraordinary influx of hatred & danger coming into our country. We must be vigilant!
 Thank you Iowa! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #FITN 
 I am especially grateful for the tremendous support I have received from the Evangelicals in the just out Iowa CNN poll. Thank you!
 I am greatly honored by the results of the CNN poll in Iowa. In the end, I believe the final results will be even better than that!
 . is going out of its way to tell failing candidates how to beat Donald Trump.The Post doesn’t get that I’m good at winning!
 Today we honor the fallen at #PearlHarbor, 74 years ago today. If you see a vet today, thank them!  #RememberOurVets 
 Poor  doesn't have what it takes- 
 I am signing copies of my book CRIPPLED AMERICA. Order yours now--makes a great holiday gift! 
 If  ever had to pay fair taxes, its stock would crash and it would crumble like a paper bag. The  scam is saving it!
 The  loses   money (a deduction) and gives owner  power to screw public on low taxation of  Big tax shelter
 The  which loses a fortune, is owned by   for purposes of keeping taxes down at his no profit company, 
 N.Y.C. has the worst Mayor in the United States. I hate watching what is happening with the dirty streets, the homeless and crime! Disgrace
 I spoke with other candidates to a Jewish group, many friends, in D.C. I said "I'm a negotiator like you" Got standing O-rated best of day!
 Obama said in his speech that Muslims are our sports heroes. What sport is he talking about, and who? Is Obama profiling?
 Thank you Graham Ledger of the Daily Ledger  for your really fair coverage and your great interview with Peter Roff of U.S. NEWS & W.R.
 Well, Obama refused to say (he just can't say it), that we are at WAR with RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISTS.
 Should have gone after the oil years ago (like I have been saying).
 Wish Obama would say ISIS, like almost everyone else, rather than ISIL.
 Is that all there is? We need a new President - FAST!
 Hope he won't spend too much time ripping apart the 2nd. Amendment!
 The podium in the Oval Office looks odd! Not good, but the words will be the key.
 Hillary won't call out radical Islam! She will be soundly defeated.
 I will be re-tweeting some of your better, most imaginative and hopefully insightful tweets. Make them good (great)! Important stuff.
 BIG NIGHT ON TWITTER TONIGHT. I WILL BE LIVE TWEETING PRESIDENT OBAMA'S SPEECH AT 7:50 P.M. ( EASTERN). MUST TALK RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISM!
 Gee,  with  was getting terrible ratings then, with me,  he set records - I saved his job, but Chuck still not nice!
 May the Festival of Lights bring our Jewish friends from around the world, health & happiness! Happy Hanukkah! 
 I have been saying it for sometime now! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Order my book CRIPPLED AMERICA for your holiday gifts. I will be signing books for the next two weeks! 
 Thank you America! Together, we will all #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! #Trump2016 
 Wow,  said some very nice things about me today on  with Chris Wallace. I am making progress, thanks George!
 I will be live-tweeting President Obama's prime-time speech tonight starting at 7:50 P.M. (Eastern).Will he finally state the real problems?
 .  Thank you so much for your nice words. I will make you look very smart!
 So, how did I do on Face The Nation?
 Watch Face The Nation - will be on now!
 Hillary just said that she will not use the term "radical Islamic" - but was incapable of saying why. She is afraid of  Obama & the e-mails!
 I will be interviewed on Face The Nation  at 10:30 A.M. Should be interesting - ENJOY!
 Was going to do a phoner this morning with  on  but they could not get their phone equipment to hook in. Will do next week.
 Wonder if Obama will ever say RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORIST?
 . &  should be fired for dishonest reporting. Thank you  for reporting the truth. #Trump2016
  you copied incompetent  incorrect story. I'm sure you would like to apologize to me on show. Thank you for the courtesy.
 . 3rd rate reporter &   CBS lied. Finished in normal manner&signed autos for 20min. Dishonest! 
 A great day in both Spencer & Davenport, Iowa! THANK YOU for the support! #Trump2016 #FITN #IAPolitics 
 Re CRIPPLED AMERICA  -- I am signing books for the next two weeks. Order yours for holiday gifts! 
 Done by a real fan! #TRUMP 
 Raleigh, North Carolina, was fantastic last night. Such incredible spirit. We all want to, and will, MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 A great night in Raleigh, North Carolina! THANK YOU! #Trump2016 
 Great Live Signing last nite! Over 25k views. I am signing books for next two weeks. Order yours for holiday gifts. 
 Good news, disloyal  stock is in a total free fall. Don't shop there for Christmas!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Congratulations, Chuck. Must be wonderful to have Donald Trump as your guest --- #BeCool! #Trump2016 
 A total refutation of the disgraceful David Brooks column in the failing  by the   http://someotherlink.com/  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 . one of the dumber bloggers  only writes purposely inaccurate pieces on me. She is in love with Marco Rubio?
 The horrible shooting that took place in San Bernardino was an absolute act of terror that many people knew about. Why didn’t they report?
 .  Martha, great interview with my son  -- smart, tough & professional. Thank you! 
 Great Live Signing last nite! Over 25k views. I am signing books for next two weeks. Order yours for holiday gifts: 
 The virtually incompetent Republican Strategist who has had a failed career, Cheri Jacobus, is incoherent with anger that her puppets died!
 . &  Please thank Alisyn Camerota, David Chalian and John King for the very professional reporting of the new CNN Poll.
 . Poll just came out, amazing numbers for those who want to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! TRUMP 36%, a 20 point lead over 2nd place. Thanks.
 . I totaly won the RJC meeting yesterday. Know many members who said "not even close." Only FULL standing O. But don't want $'s
 Watch my live book signing now! 
 I invite you to join my campaign to Make America Great Again! Sign up to Volunteer! 
 Purchase your copy of CRIPPLED AMERICA now & be on potential call list for my live streaming signing event tonite. 
 Thank you!! #Trump2016 
 Thank you, New Hampshire! Great people -- see you next week! 
 Via  
 Great to see the construction of the Old Post Office on Penn Ave. Going fast - under budget, ahead of schedule!
 It was recently reported that 3rd rate $ losing  is a foil for the Clintons. Questions given to Clinton in advance. No credibility.
 Thank you so much for the wonderful article, Robert Davi. 
 Thank you! Vote in 2016! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Thank you! #Trump2016 
 CRIPPLED AMERICA is the perfect gift for friends & family. Order signed copy & join me at 7:30pm, live streaming! 
 Why can't  get better reporters than Ben Schreckenger? Guy is a major lightweight with no credibility. So dishonest!
 Loved being in Manassas, VA last night. Such incredible spirit! Now in DC for a speech, will then visit Old Post Office under construction.
 CRIPPLED AMERICA is perfect gift for friends & family. Order signed copy & join me tonite live streaming 7:30 
 As a presidential candidate, I have instructed my long-time doctor to issue, within two weeks, a full medical report-it will show perfection
 I consider my health, stamina and strength one of my greatest assets.The world has watched me for many years and can so testify-great genes!
 Congratulations on the GREAT job done by POLICE and law enforcement on the California shootings. Give credit where credit is due.
 Heading to Manassas, Virginia, for a rally. Will have a moment of silence for the victims of the California shootings. So sad!
 #TeamTrump. Police and law enforcement seem to have killed one of the California shooters and are in a shootout with the others. Go police
 A signed copy of CRIPPLED AMERICA is the ultimate gift. Order now & join my live streaming book signing on 12/3 
 California shooting looks very bad. Good luck to law enforcement and God bless. This is when our police are so appreciated!
 Thank you CBS & Breitbart-total vindication! Will the mainstream media apologize? Many, many witnesses.  #Trump2016 
 I beat Hillary in the new  Poll head to head.  SHE HAS NO STRENGTH OR STAMINA, both of which are needed to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 LIVE on #Periscope: Live with the Donald 
 Join me at 2:00pmEST today - live from Trump Tower - via Facebook & Periscope! 
 Illegal immigrant children, non-Mexicans surge across border at record rate 
 Order signed copy of CRIPPLED AMERICA & submit a question for my live streaming book signing on 12/3 at 7:30 pm. 
 I WILL BE ON   AT 7:30 -NOW!
 The truth continues to come out after 14 years. A truth that many in the media did not want to tell. #Trump2016 
 Just arrived in New Hampshire. Another packed venue! Will be fun.
 You would think a paper like the Washington Post would be fair and objective. For the record, almost all polls showed I won all debates.
 Highly untalented Wash Post blogger, Jennifer Rubin, a real dummy, never writes fairly about me. Why does Wash Post have low IQ people?
 Order a signed copy of CRIPPLED AMERICA & submit a question for my live streaming book signing on 12/3 at 7:30 pm 
 What is Obama thinking? 
 Curtis Sliwa - doing tv commentary on 9/13/2001. Good job Curtis. Please send your apologies to  
 Look at the editorial I was just sent from the NY Post on 9/14/01 - 3 days after collapse of WTC. Any apologies? 
 Jamiel Shaw was incredible on  this morning. His son, who was viciously killed by an illegal immigrant, is so proud of pop!
 I want to thank all my friends in Macon for the special evening and great reception. What a crowd of incredible people!
 A signed copy of CRIPPLED AMERICA makes a great gift. Order & join my live streaming book signing event on 12/3 
 A great night in Macon, Georgia! Thank you for all of the support. Together, we will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Order signed copy of CRIPPLED AMERICA & have opportunity to submit question for my live streaming book signing 12/3 
 Meeting with African American Pastors at Trump Tower was amazing. Wonderful news conference followed. Now off to Georgia for big speech!
 We need a great leader- now! 
 We better be vigilant, careful, and strong. 
 The Republican establishment, out of self preservation, is concerned w/ my high poll #'s. More concerned are Dems—I beat Hillary heads up!
 How is Chris Christie running the state of NJ, which is deeply troubled, when he is spending all of his time in NH? New Jerseyans not happy!
 Wow, the MSM is really going after me. 12,000 in Sarasota, a love fest, hardly a mention. Only one negativity - they only want negatives!
 When will  get some real political talent rather than political commentators like Errol Louis, who doesn't have a clue! Others bad also.
 Great job  on  You made kooky Cokie Roberts and  look even dumber than they are. You will be right!
 After my meeting with the pastors, it's off to Georgia for a big rally - many thousands of great people will be there, a beautiful movement!
 Will be meeting on Monday at Trump Tower with a large group of African American Pastors. Many I know-wonderful people! Not a press event.
 Just watched Cookie Roberts on  Her predictions have been so wrong for so long that she has lost all credibility. Just another sad case
 . has to do better reporting if it wants to keep up with the crowd.So totally one-sided and biased against me that it is becoming boring
 I will be on  in an interview with  on Sunday morning. So much to talk about!
 The Sarasota, Florida, rally today was amazing. 12,000 people chanting their love for our country. It's going to happen, this is a MOVEMENT!
 . Kayleigh McEnany was great on you network today. You should have her  on more often! Thank you Kayleigh for your nice words.
 Sarasota was an unbelievable success. We expected 5,000, a record, but 12,000 showed up! Great love in the air! 
 We boarded the helicopter for Sarasota earlier & will be landing soon! See you there. #Trump2016 
 Virtually no-one has spent more money in helping the  American people with disabilities than me. Will discuss today at my speech in Sarasota
 The reporter who pulled-back from his 14 year old never retracted story is having fun. I don't know what he looks like and don't know him!
 I will be going to Sarasota, Florida, today for a big rally with amazing people! I have one goal on mind: MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Pollster Trend  National GOP Average 223 national polls & 33 pollsters. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 The failing  should focus on fair and balanced reporting rather than constant hit jobs on me. Yesterday 3 boring articles, today2!
 I do not know the reporter for the  or what he looks like. I was showing a person groveling to take back a statement made long ago!
 Great new poll numbers! Thank you for your support! #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Happy Thanksgiving to all. Have a great day and look forward to the future. We will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 The numbers at the   are so dismal, especially advertising revenue, that big help will be needed fast. A once great institution-SAD!
 So, since the people at the  have made all bad decisions over the last decade, why do people care what they write. Incompetent!
 The dopes at the  bought the Boston Globe for $1.3 billion and sold it for $1.00. Their great old headquarters-gave it away! So dumb
 The  is so poorly run and managed that other family members are looking to take over control. With unfunded liabilities-big trouble!
 The failing  should be focused on good reporting and the papers financial survival and not with constant hits on Donald Trump!
 Credible Source on 9-11 Muslim Celebrations: FBI  via 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I LIVE IN NEW JERSEY &  IS RIGHT: MUSLIMS DID CELEBRATE ON 9/11 HERE! WE SAW IT! 
 Thank you for your continued support! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
  just totally bombed on   has him on even though he has lost all credibility - a loser!  Fox should dump Rove.
 South Carolina was so great last night. Will be back soon!
 Why would  use  as an election analyst when he has made so many mistakes. He still thinks Romney won. An establishment dope!
 Myrtle Beach, South Carolina  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 A wonderful evening in South Carolina - big crowd, amazing energy!
 New  national poll released. Thank you America! #Trump2016 
 Thank you for your nice words   for the nice words on  with Chris Wallace. #FNS #Trump2016
 What is Frank VanderSloot getting for agreeing to back Marco Rubio? Last victim was Mitt Romney - see how that turned out.
 . came up to see me. A really nice and talented guy. 
 Will be doing  at 10 PM on   As always with Sean, will be interesting!
 Heading to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. Really big crowd—so much to talk about!
 Republicans must stop relying on losers like  if they want to start winning presidential elections. Be tough and get smart!
 Just left Columbus rally of 14,000 people --- a far bigger crowd than even I expected! Unbelievable evening, incredible spirit in the arena!
 Heading for Ohio - really big crowd of amazing people! Much to talk about!
 Going to Ohio, home of one of the worst presidential candidates in history--Kasich. Can't debate, loves #ObamaCare--dummy!
 . reports that  getting ready to treat me unfairly—big spending planned against me. That wasn’t the deal!
 Via  9/18/01. I want an apology! Many people have tweeted that I am right!  http://someotherlink.com/
 When you do your Christmas shopping remember how disloyal  was to the subject of illegal immigration. #BoycottMacys #DumpMacys
 Hillary, there is nothing to laugh about- 
 Going to Columbus, Ohio today for a tremendous rally of thousands. The silent majority is no longer silent!
 . has one of the worst reporters in the business --  wouldn’t know the truth if it hit him in the face.
 . continues to do extremely dishonest reporting. Always looking for a hit to bring them back into relevancy—ain’t working!
 . thank you for the nice comments recently, especially on  My family & I greatly appreciate your kind words.
 Hillary Clinton is weak on illegal immigration, among many other things. She is strong on corruption - corruption is what she's best at!
 Great poll numbers! Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 We better get tough with RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISTS, and get tough now, or the life and safety of our wonderful country will be in jeopardy!
 13 Syrian refugees were caught trying to get into the U.S. through the Southern Border. How many made it?  WE NEED THE WALL!
 Great poll numbers all over and beating Hillary Clinton one on one. Thank you!
 Big new  Poll to be announced at 9:00 A.M. on This Week with  I will be interviewed on show!
 . just announced that I am leading  BIG in the new  Poll which will be shown on This Week at 9:00 A.M. I will be on show
 Will be interviewed on  at 8:00 A.M.
 I find that  is a far more professional operation than 
 .ccolvinj  is one of the truly bad reporters---working for an organization that has totally lost its way. Stories are fictional garbage.
 . great job - we are all proud of you!
 Thank you to all law enforcement agencies for a fabulous job! #LEO #LESM #Trump2016 
 Thank you for a great afternoon Birmingham, Alabama! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 It's too bad so few people showed up to  Family Leader dinner. Next year I'll try & be there- and they'll have a huge crowd!
 Thank you John Nolte for  wonderful analysis & reporting.
 Rumor has it - Pataki, Kasich, & Senator Lindsey Graham are dropping out of the race very soon. Hope it's not true, they're so easy to beat!
 So nice when media properly polices media. Thank you  
 A woman who got fired after two days of working with Scott Walker - a wacko - now trying to raise funds to fight me.
 Heading to Birmingham, Alabama, and a massive crowd of incredible people! 12 noon - will be wild.
 To show you how politicians act, Bobby Jindal spent $1,000 to register in New Hampshire & dropped out the next day. Such a waste!
 We're stuck with the worst mayor in the United States. Too bad, but New York City will survive!
 People are really liking my new book, "Crippled America." Check it out!
 Join us at 10pmE on   with  #MeetTheTrumps #ABC2020 
 #ICYMI: I joined #OnTheRecord with  on  this evening. #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Looking forward to watching the legendary  interview my family (and me) tonight on  at 10:00. Many things to talk about!
 Tune into the legendary  at 10pmE on  tonight. #MeetTheTrumps for a full hour  #ABC2020! 
 .    Please thank Charles Lane for his new found confidence. He has made a very good bet!
 . Thank you, a very wise bet! Best wishes.
 Just got back from South Carolina. Going to Alabama tomorrow!
 . is weak on illegal immigration & totally incompetent as a manager and leader - no strength or stamina to be #POTUS!
 The legendary  interviews my family and me tonight at 10:00 on  . Don't miss it! 
 . should focus on running #NYC & all of the problems that he has caused with his ineptitude, & not be so focused on me!
 Can you believe the worst Mayor in the U.S., & probably the worst Mayor in the history of #NYC,  just called me a blow hard!
 Thank you for a great afternoon, South Carolina! See you next Tuesday! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I didn't suggest a database-a reporter did. We must defeat Islamic terrorism & have surveillance, including a watch list, to protect America
 Under our President, ISIS is gaining great strength- 
 My family has the honor of being interviewed for a full hour by the legendary  tonight  - 10pmE. 
 . a Fox contributor, isn't smart enough to know what is going on at the border.  made the point far better!
 Going to South Carolina now, great place, SRO crowd. Iowa was amazing yesterday!
 The media must denigrate ISIS at all levels or youth will continue to be drawn to it. These are low level degenerates, NOT masterminds!
 The media must immediately stop calling ISIS leaders "MASTERMINDS." Call them instead thugs and losers. Young people must not go into ISIS!
 A wonderful afternoon in Iowa! Great people! Heading now to Florida - tomorrow, South Carolina! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016
 A great evening in Iowa! Thank you Des Moines Area Community College for a great forum! #Trump2016 #IAForums 
 John Kasich was managing director of Lehman Brothers when it crashed, bringing down the world and ruining people's lives. A total failure!
 Once John Kasich announced he was running for president, and opened his mouth, people realized he was a complete & total dud!
 John Kasich fell right into President Obama’s trap on ObamaCare, and the people of Ohio are suffering for it. Shame!
 Doesn’t help Kasich to do negative ads on me because he still has to go through everyone else  - he’s almost last.
 John Kasich ad guy wanted to work for me, but his proposal was a rip off – I said NO! Now ripping Kasich.
 I loved beating John Kasich in the debates, but it was easy—he came in dead last!
 Kasich has already spent $6 million on ads in New Hampshire and his numbers have gone down. People from NH are smart!
 Watch Kasich squirm --- if he is not truthful in his negative ads I will sue him just for fun!
 I want to do negative ads on John Kasich, but he is so irrelevant to the race that I don’t want to waste my money.
 John Kasich, despite being Governor of Ohio, is losing to me in the Ohio polls. Pathetic!
 John Kasich should focus his special interest money on building up his failed image, not negative ads on me.
 Governor Kasich, whose failed campaign & debating skills have brought him way down in the polls, is going to spend $2.5 million against me.
 The legendary Barbara Walters interviews Melania Trump and me on a special this Friday night at 10:00 on ABC. Don't miss it!
 Thank you Worcester, Massachusetts!#MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Just the beginning & it is going to get worse. Rates & deductibles are so high nobody is going to be able to use it. 
 Has anybody read this story about Marco Rubio - devastating! 
 I told you! Premiums are soaring! #RepealObamacare #Trump2016 
 Thank you (Chris)  I have great respect for professionals that are willing to report so honestly & fairly. 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you for your support! Together we can #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! #Trump2016 
 The POLICE in Paris did a fantastic job. Very brave - not easy!
 A great review of my Aberdeen course by prestigious   Some say greatest ever built.  
 Everyone is now saying how right I was with illegal immigration & the wall. After Paris, they’re all on the bandwagon.
 We need new leadership- fast! 
 I skipped a speech given years ago at Mar-a-Lago by dopey  because he’s BORING—he never forgot!
 Dopey  a big proponent of the Iraq War and other catastrophes, doesn’t like me very much. That means I win!
 Broken down political pundit  who is wrong almost all of the time, should be thrown off  Boring and totally biased!
 Eight Syrians were just caught on the southern border trying to get into the U.S. ISIS maybe? I told you so. WE NEED A BIG & BEAUTIFUL WALL!
 Ben Carson is being severely criticized for being incapable of understanding foreign policy be one of his top consultants. Not good!
 Via Politico: "Trump Extends Lead in New Hampshire Poll" 
 Very nice article from Daily Mail 
 Great New Poll 
 How does Ben Carson survive this problem – really big. Similar story on front page of New York Times. 
 Thank you for all of your support! Let's #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! #Trump2016 
 The great Barbara Walters interviews Melania Trump and me on a Special Friday night at 10:00 on ABC.… 
 I will be interviewed by   tonight at 10:00 on  . Much, much, much to talk about!
 Melania and I just had interview with the legendary  Watch #abc2020 this Friday. Tonight we talk ISIS 
 . is doing very badly. I can say from experience their reporting is terrible & highly inaccurate. Sadly, they are now irrelevant!
 One of the saddest things in journalism is what happened to the formerly great  They have lost their way and are no longer credible.
 What is our President doing? 
 Refugees from Syria are now pouring into our great country. Who knows who they are - some could be ISIS. Is our president insane?
 I, along with almost everyone else, have so little confidence in President Obama. He has a horrible attitude-a man who is resigned to defeat
 So many great polls like Reuters - big leads everywhere. New Hampshire really special! We will win big and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Thank you Tennessee! #Trump2016 
 Just received a copy of  new book -- a great read! Sarah is a terrific person.
 Great poll numbers out of  Thank you! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Just leaving Knoxville, TN --- what a crowd, what amazing people! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Just landing in Knoxville, Tennessee! Massive crowd expected! Will all have a great time, despite serious subject matter.
 I agree! The headline says it all. #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Discussing #SyrianRefugees with  on  back on 10/3/2015. #ISIS 
 Will be landing in Knoxville, Tennessee shortly - tremendous crowd expected. It's all very simple, we want to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 Republicans must stop listening to dopes like  who still insists Mitt Romney won the last election. Think big & think strong!
 Wow,  shares are down more than 40% this year. I never knew my ties & shirts not being sold there would have such a big impact!
 Interesting article from highly respected Wayne Allyn Root 
 Remember, I was the one who said attack the oil (ISIS source of wealth) a long time ago. Everyone scoffed, now they're attacking the oil.
 Tom Brady just did it again. He is not only a great guy, he is, without question, the BEST quarterback!
 President Obama just told President Putin how important the Russian air strikes against ISIS have been. I TOLD YOU SO!
 .    John, focus on running your company, I think the service is terrible! Try hiring some good managers.
 Glad to see that  lost her championship fight last night. Was soundly beaten - not a nice person!
 I have watched sloppy Graydon Carter fail and close Spy Magazine and now am watching him fail at  Magazine. He is a total loser!
 . Magazine is doing really poorly. It has gotten worse and worse over the years, and has lost almost all of it's former allure!
 We need strong, tough and brilliant leadership now more than ever!  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I had a great time in Texas yesterday. A tremendous crowd of wonderful and enthusiastic people. Will be back soon!
 . on ISIS&OIL FIELDS! Saying it for years!  you should acknowledge this! #Trump2016 
 When will President Obama issue the words RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISM? He  can't say it, and unless he will,  the problem will not be solved!
 I think everyone will like my new and very successful book, Crippled America. Go get it and let me know what you think!
 Wow, Bernie Sanders just admitted that the real unemployment rate is 10% (it is actually over 20%) and for  African American youth - 51%.
 Hillary and Sanders are not doing well, but what is the failed former Mayor of Baltimore doing on that stage? O'Malley is a clown.
 Why won't President Obama use the term Islamic Terrorism? Isn't it now, after all of this time and so much death, about time!
 Great news out of New Hampshire! DonaldTrump is pulling away from the pack w/ 2nd is 17% behind him! #Trump2016 
 We need much tougher, much smarter leadership - and we need it NOW!
 President Obama said "ISIL continues to shrink" in an interview just hours before the horrible attack in Paris. He is just so bad! CHANGE.
 My prayers are with the victims and hostages in the horrible Paris attacks. May God be with you all.
 Boy is this guy  tough on me. So totally biased. As a reporter, he should be ashamed of himself! #Trump2016
 They laughed at me when I said to bomb the ISIS controlled oil fields. Now they are not laughing and doing what I said. #Trump2016
 Thank you  for giving me credit for my vision on bombing the oil fields. Should have been done long ago. #Trump2016
 Great honor to be inducted into the NJ Boxing Hall of Fame last night. Thank you! Timing could not have been better! 
 .  Carly, whose campaign is dead, is making false statements about me in order to salvage hope! Sad.
 . had to inject herself into my factual statements concerning Ben Carson in order to breathe life into her failing campaign!
 . I only said I was on  four weeks ago with Putin—never said I was in Green Room. Separate pieces—great ratings!
 .  Ben Carson said in his own book that he has a pathological temper & pathological disease. I didn’t say it, he did. Apology?
 . Carly—I did graduate from Wharton and did very well. Who is your fact checker? Will you apologize?
 . Carly, not just you, I also told Gov. Kasich to “let Jeb talk, give him a chance” because Kasich was constantly cutting in.
 Happy Friday the 13th 
 Thank you Iowa! I appreciate all of your support  &  this evening! #Trump2016 #IACaucus 
 First candidate in Virginia with over 16,000 validated signatures for the ballot. An honor - thank you! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 I will be on  with  at 7PM. Tune in! #Trump2016
 I will be on with  tonight at 6PM. #Trump2016
 Macy’s was very disloyal to me bc of my strong stance on illegal immigration. Their stock has crashed! #BoycottMacys 
 Thank you  for showing the  was wrong. So dishonest! 
 From 2% to 27% in Texas - quite a jump into first place!
 Wow, pres. candidate Ben Carson, who is very weak on illegal Immigration, just said  he likes amnesty and a pathway to citizenship.
 Total fool  is part of the Republican Establishment problem. An all talk, no action dummy! 
 . and dopey Karl Rove made a mistake and purposely mischaracterized my statement on the terrible TPP deal. 
 Why does the failing  write a false editorial about me and let dummy  make the same mistake in the same edition of the paper?
 . is a biased dope who wrote falsely about me re China and TPP. This moron wasted $430 million on political campaigns and lost 100%
 We, as a country, either have borders or we don't. IF WE DON'T HAVE BORDERS, WE DON'T HAVE A COUNTRY!
 Why wouldn't the  call for comment or clarification before writing an editorial which is so totally wrong. No wonder it is doing poorly!
 When and how are the dummies at the  going to apologize to me for their totally incorrect Editorial on me. I want "smart" trade deals.
 The  Editorial Board is so wrong, so often. They got info from an incorrect story in another pub. Why not watch and listen to debate.
 . Editorial Board should review my debate statement re China and T.P.P. and apologize. China not part but will get their way in later.
 Today's  Editorial is WRONG again. I know that China is not in the new T.P.P. trade deal but would come in latter through a back door.
 I will be interviewed on   at 7:30
 All seven on-line polls, including Drudge and Time, with thousands of respondents, said I won the debate.  said I was "so, so."
 Will be interviewed by  tonight at 8 PM.
 I will be on  at 8PM tonight. Tune in!
 . Gerard—wonderful job last night as moderator of the debate. I told many, “really smart and elegant.”
 I never said that China was in the bad TPP trade deal but that China would come in the back door at a later date.  
 Just returned home from the great state of New Hampshire. Have made so many friends there--special place!
 Happy Veterans Day. To those who have served, thank you for your special work.
 Thank you  &  -- a great show! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Loved doing the debate...won Drudge and all on-line polls! Amazing evening, moderators did an outstanding job.
 Will be on  live from New Hampshire - 7:00 A.M. Talking about the debate and more!
 I will be on  live from New Hampshire tomorrow at 7am. #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 People Magazine: "Donald Trump Was Right: He Gave SNL Its Best Ratings in Nearly 4 Years--Plus, What You Didn't See" 
 Thank you South Carolina! #Trump2016 
 Thank you New Jersey! #Trump2016 
 Go out and buy CRIPPLED AMERICA: How to Make America Great Again. Doing really well. Great Thanksgiving or Christmas present!
 I will be interviewed by  on  at 7:00 A.M. There is much to talk about!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Thank you to  Robert Rorke for the really nice review of #SNL. So many enjoyed it - very gratifying! 
 Marco Rubio is totally weak on illegal immigration & in favor of easy amnesty. A lightweight choker - bad for #USA!
 Marco Rubio couldn't even respond properly to President Obama's State of the Union Speech without pouring sweat & chugging water. He choked!
 Marco Rubio is a total lightweight who I wouldn’t hire to run one of my smaller companies - a highly overrated politician!
 A great evening in Springfield, Illinois. Thank you for all of the support! #Trump2016 
 Great job on   Nobody could have done it better!
 Thanks Piers. Greatly appreciated.  
 .  should listen. Ana Navarro has no talent, no TV persona, and works for Bush—a total conflict of interest. 
 . Thanks so much. Really appreciate your comments.  I will help the veterans like no one else. 
 Thank you to all of those who gave me such wonderful reviews for my performance on  Saturday Night Live. Best ratings in 4 years!
 . Highest rated Saturday Night Live in four years. 47% higher than their opening night with Hillary & Miley Cyrus. Nice words
 Television ratings for  Saturday Night Live just came out and they were great - the best since 2011. Very few protesters!
 At 10:30 I will be interviewed on both  by  and  Face The Nation by John Dickerson. This after long evening!
 I will be interviewed by   on    at 10:00 A.M.
 .  Will be interviewed by Jake Tapper at 9:00 A.M. Enjoy.
 . - So much fun last night!
 Will be on  at 8:00 A.M.
 Amazing evening at Saturday Night Live!
 I am at the Saturday Night Live Studio - electricity all over the place. We will be doing a "tweeting" skit, so stay tuned!
 They are saying that tickets to tonight's Saturday Night Live are the hardest to get in the history of this great show! Off to a good start!
 Saturday Night Live has some incredible things in store tonight. The great thing about playing myself is that it will be authentic! Enjoy
 . Please thank your brother for his nice words on television. Seems like a great guy and character! 
 One of the dumbest political pundits on television is Chris Stirewalt of  Wrong facts - check Fox debate rankings, Trump #1. Dope!
 Would be nice if  learned how to read the polls before writing his next story. Probably done on purpose, but not good reporting!
  has become a sad case. His magazine is failing badly, probably doesn't have long to go, and his predictions are always wrong!
 Will be on  tonight. Signing a copy of Crippled America for Bill! 
 So sad that Obama rejected Keystone Pipeline. Thousands of jobs, good for the environment, no downside!
 Happy Birthday to the great  He's done so many wonderful things, not the least of which is his fantastic family. I love Billy!
 Getting ready for  commercial. 
 . Thank you so much for the nice words and support--really enjoy listening to your ideas and thoughts.
 I think it would be a good idea—and fair—to include  &  in the debate. Both solid & good guys. 
 Carson now admits his friend named "Bob," who he tried to stab (Bob was saved by his belt buckle!), no longer exists as Bob. Wrong name!
 With Ben Carson wanting to hit his mother on head with a hammer, stab a friend and Pyramids built for grain storage - don't people get it?
 Such bad reporting: A puff piece on Ben Carson in the  states that Carson "is trying to solidify his lead." But I am #1, easily! Sad
 Florida Ethics Commission Advocate comes down hard on Rubio. So do two people who worked with him. Said he used the wrong credit card! Sure.
 A great honor to easily finish FIRST in the  poll tabulation even though some of my best polls were not used in determining winner!
 The Carson story is either a total fabrication or, if true, even worse-trying to hit mother over the head with a hammer or stabbing friend!
 Rubio lied about my meeting w/ Hispanic activists. I didn’t change my opinion but treated them w/ respect. Shame! 
 . should have corrected Jeb Bush when he said that I "ran for president twice." Never ran, merely considered running!
 Jeb Bush just said about Marco Rubio, "he's my friend!" Pure political speak. Why can't he be truthful and say "disloyal guy, no friend!"
 Also, tune in to the  at 7:00am. I will be on to discuss the campaign, my new ads and #CrippledAmerica.
 I will unveil my first campaign ads on  at 6:30am tomorrow. Enjoy! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Wow!  poll just came out. #1 with 26%! Almost as importantly, I am the strongest on economic issues by far! #Trump2016
 Just landed in New Hampshire - a very exciting morning planned!
 Isn't it terrible that  used a poll not used before (I.B.D.) when I was down, but refuses to use it now when I am up?
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 I will be on  tonight at 10pmE talking about my new book #CrippledAmerica and much more! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016
 Marco Rubio would keep Barack Obama’s executive order on amnesty intact. See article. Cannot be President. 
 . is looking for a new puppet after Governor Walker and Jeb Bush cratered. He now likes Rubio--next fail.
 Join me today, Nov 3rd, in #TrumpTowerNYC at noon. I'll be signing copies of my new book CRIPPLED AMERICA. Don't miss it!
 I will be interviewed on  at 7:00 A.M. and  at 7:50. Talking about my new book, out today, Crippled America.
 Join me tomorrow, Nov. 3rd, at 12pm in #TrumpTowerNY. I’ll be signing copies of my new book CRIPPLED AMERICA.  Don’t miss it!
 My interview with  &  at  airing at 5PM on  
 . used this poll (nobody else did) when I was down—wonder if she’ll use it now that I’m up? 
 .  Why don’t you use new polls instead of the single ancient national poll that was a tiny bit negative. Dishonest reporting!
 Meet me at  and get your copy of my new book CRIPPLED AMERICA signed on 11/3 at 12pm! 
 Thank you Carl Higbie (former Navy Seal) for you support of my plan to straighten out the Veterans Administration-a mess!Great job 
 . Marco only won the debate in the minds of desperate people. I won every on-line poll, even crazy  Marco good looking?
 Sirius National News at 7:30 A.M. Steve Bannon. 
 Now that Iran ripped us off by making one of the best deals of any kind in history, they have just moved to block any imports from the U.S.
 I will be on Sirius XM RADIO, National News Show, at 7:30 A.M. (Monday) hosted by the great Steve Bannon. 
 Thank you  for the nice, and true, words on #Media Buzz with terrific Howie Kurtz. Leading New Hampshire 30 to 12. 
 While in politics it is often smart to send out false messages, one thing is clear:  That Hillary does not want to run against TRUMP.
 Join me Tuesday Nov. 3rd at 12 PM in #TrumpTower in NYC. I'll be signing copies of my book CRIPPLED AMERICA. Don't miss it!
 If Jeb Bush were more competent he could not have lost the skirmish with Marco in the debate. BAD facts for Marco if properly delivered!
 Marco Rubio will not win. Weak on illegal immigration, strong on amnesty and has the appearance to killers of the world as a "lightweight".
 I told you in speeches months ago that Jeb and Marco do not like each other. Marco is too ambitious and very disloyal to Jeb as his mentor!
 Jeb's new slogan - "Jeb can fix it". I never thought of Jeb as a crook! Stupid message, the word "fix" is not a good one to use in politics!
 Anybody that believes in strong borders and stopping illegal immigration cannot vote for Marco Rubio  READ THIS: 
 Further proof that Gang of Eight member Marco Rubio is weak on illegal immigration is Paul Singer's, Mr. Amnesty, endorsement.Rubs can't win
 Gov. John Kasich has really failed on the campaign trail. I thought he would have been far more talented. He is just wasting time & money!
 .  John Oliver had his people call to ask me to be on his very boring and low rated show. I said "NO THANKS" Waste of time & energy!
 Few people know that   is still in business. Tell your writer  Alisa Soloman that I left The Apprentice to run for president
 No complaints but how many people would be watching these really dumb but record setting debates if I wasn't in them? Interesting question!
 Thank you James Freeman of the  for the very nice words. All polls said I won the debate except NBC (3rd). Explain to Daniel Henninger!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Support Coach Kennedy and his right, together with his young players, to pray on the football field. Liberty Institute just suspended him!
 Just left Virginia where I unveiled my healthcare and other plans for our great Veterans! They will be very happy! 
 . said such nice things about me during the debate that I thought I'd do his show,  on Monday (2:30pm EST).
 The  Wall Street Journal loves to write badly about me. They better be careful or I will unleash big time on them. Look forward to it!
 Lifting off right now for U.S.S. Wisconsin in Norfolk. See ya'
 I told you so- just lost it's top person. Poor results and no money to pay him. If they were legit, they would be doing far better!
 I am leaving for Norfolk, Virginia - the great battleship U.S.S. Wisconsin - for a big rally and really big crowd. See you soon!
 I see Marco Rubio just landed another billionaire to give big money to his Superpac, which are total scams. Marco must address him as "SIR"!
 The new NBC POLL has me in first place but said I was third in the debate - I demand a recount (just kidding!). EVERY other poll had me #1.
 Black Lives Matter protesters totally disrupt Hillary Clinton event. She looked lost. This is not what we need with ISIS, CHINA, RUSSIA etc.
 I am going to save Medicare and Medicaid, Carson wants to abolish, and failing candidate Gov. John Kasich doesn't have a clue - weak!
 When candidate John Kasich, on the  talked about dismantling Medicare and Medicaid, he was referring to Ben Carson.
 . Great job on  tonight. Thanks for your nice words about my children. Class!
 Happy Birthday to my friend  
 Via The Political Insider: “Donald Trump Just Received The Best News Possible!” 
 Donald Trump Leads Polls in Florida 
 Super PACs should be disavowed by anyone running for President. They are a total scam on our system and country! I am self-funding.
 Thank you  for your wonderful words. We will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Happy Birthday to my wonderful daughter, 
 Thank you  for explaining to  and  and so many others that I am leading in almost all national & state polls.
 Thank you  for  the nice words on  I will win and Make America Great Again!
 Loved doing the debate last night on  Check out all of the polls! Everyone agrees that Harwood bombed!
 Wow, just heard really bad stuff about the failing   How much longer  will they be around? Some very untalented reporters.
 My interview on  with  had a 40%+ ratings increase over same Sunday last year. 20% over last week.
 Post-Debate via  Thank you! #Trump2016 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 I was #1 on Twitter -- and so positive. Thank you! 
 Join me Tuesday, Nov. 3rd at 12pm in Trump Tower NYC.  I’ll be signing copies of my new book CRIPPLED AMERICA.  Don’t miss it!
 . Congratulations and good luck - you will do a GREAT job for our wonderful U.S.A.!
 Failing host  a mental basketcase, loves SUPERPACS - in other words, he wants your politicians totally controlled by lobbyists!
 Via  Who won the #GOPDebate? 
 CNBC poll: Trump won #GOPDebate #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you! 
 Thank you to everybody for your wonderful comments on my debate performance - it was a lot of fun! Today I will be speaking in Reno, Nevada.
 Thank you  and   for all of your nice words and comments on the debate!
 The money losing  is considered by many in the world of politics to be the dumbest and most slanted of the political sites. Losers!
 Drudge Poll on who won the 3rd #GOPDebate. Thank you! 
 Thank you Colorado! An honor to win   #GOPDebate Poll. 
 Thank you, Jonathan. Greatly appreciated! 
 Thanks,  You're great!
 The #CNBCGOPDebate poll closed with #Trump2016 declared the official winner. Thank you!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thank you! #GOPDebate  MakeAmericaGreatAgain  http://someotherlink.com/
 Thanks everyone, they all said  I won the debate. Even won the  Poll!
 Via  "Trump still in the lead by a whopping 14 points after fluke survey had put Carson on top"- 
   POLL  TOTAL: TRUMP 25.22  CARSON 19.78  RUBIO 9.67....
 . Poll, one of the most highly respected, was just released. Wow, wait until the media digests these numbers - won't be happy!
 I'm sure the media will not report the highly respected new national poll that just came out via The Economist. 32%! 
 Does anybody think that  will get their fictitious  polling numbers corrected sometime prior to the start of the debate. Sad!
 . can you believe Kasie Hunt's poor and purposely inaccurate reporting on my great night and crowd in Iowa.  is a scam!
 . continues to report fictious poll numbers. Number one, based on every statistic, is Trump (by a wide margin). They just can't say it!
 After a great evening and packed auditorium in Iowa, I am now in Colorado looking forward to what I am sure will be a very unfair debate!
 Thank you Iowa! Great night---see you soon! #Trump2016 
 Via the Washington Post: Inside the World of Donald Trump's Super Fans: 
 Just out, wonderful poll in North Carolina. #Trump2016  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 I am leaving for Sioux City, Iowa - great event (rally).
 National GOP Presidential Poll via   35.6% #Trump2016 
 Thank you  for the wonderful story. 
 New Gravis national poll just out --- 36%! Very nice! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Dopey  who has lost all credibility with so many dumb statements and  picks, said last week on  that Biden was in.
 #TrumpTODAY Watch my appearance on the  from this morning 
 All Presidential candidates should immediately disavow their Super PAC’s. They're not only breaking the spirit of the law but the law itself
 Re Super PAC scam:  What the other candidates are doing is a disgrace.
 This whole Super PAC scam is very unfair to a person like me who has disavowed all PAC's & is self-funding.
 Ben Carson wants to abolish Medicare - I want to save it and Social Security.
 Leaving for New Hampshire now. Will be doing the  there, live at 7:00 A.M. New  Poll of New Hampshire: Trump 38 Carson 12!
 An aerial shot of Jacksonville crowd yesterday! I may as well show you because the media won't.  #Trump2016 
 Remember that Carson, Bush and Rubio are VERY weak on illegal immigration. They will do NOTHING to stop it. Our country will be overrun!
 Do you think I will get credit for keeping Ford in U.S. Who cares, my supporters know the truth. Think what can be done as president!
 Word is that Ford Motor, because of my constant badgering at packed events, is going to cancel their deal to go to Mexico and stay in U.S.
 .  Great numbers from  Poll. Also from ABC-Washington Post Poll. Thank you!  
 Do you believe that  is still playing up the old Iowa poll numbers and no mention of the ABCWashington Post or just out CBS results?
 . Poll - WOW!  New Hampshire  TRUMP 38% CARSON 12% BUSH 8%  South Carolina TRUMP 40% CARSON 23% CRUZ 8% Iowa TRUMP 27% CARSON 27%
 Watch my interview on  Face The Nation now and, also, the new CBS POLLS which, if good for me, the media won't report!
 Big poll comes out today on Face The Nation at 10:30 on 
 Watch  at 9:00 A.M.  Then interviewed on   at 10:00 A.M. and then, at 10:30 A.M., watch Face The Nation.
 Ben Carson has never created a job in his life (well, maybe a nurse). I have created tens of thousands of jobs, it's what I do.
 I spell out some of the differences between Ben Carson and myself at 9:00 A.M. on   Ben is very weak on illegal immigration.
 A big POLL will be announced this morning on   Face The Nation. I wonder if I do well if the press will report the results? Doubt it
 This is just not the right time for Jeb Bush. His campaign is in total disarray, too much staff being paid way too much money = U.S. GOVT.
 I will be doing a major sit down interview on State of the Union With Jake Tapper at 9:00 A.M. on  Enjoy!
 While Jeb Bush is cutting staff and salaries, after having paid ridiculous amounts of money, why did he pay so much in the first place?
 . is slashing campaign salaries, people making millions. If he can't manage his campaign, how can he manage our countries finances?
 . had a tiny 300 person crowd at Senator Tim Scott's forum. I had thousands, and they had real passion! 
 . is totally lost -- he spends too much time managing the bloated staff of his campaign & not enough talking about America's future.
 Expecting a great crowd of amazing people. Questions will be live! #TrumpToday
 I will be doing the  live from New Hampshire at 7am on Monday morning. #TrumpToday
 Will be doing a sit down interview with    on Sunday morning at 9:00. Tough questions and hopefully very good answers!
 Just finished speaking in Jacksonville, Florida. Incredible crowd, fantastic people. Thank you!
 Saying goodbye to some of my great workers at  in Miami. 
 Leaving for Jacksonville now. See you there! Miami was great.
 Massive crowds already forming in Jacksonville - will be and incredible day - 12 noon!  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Crowd was amazing tonight at Trump National Doral in Miami. Love and excitement in the ballroom. Tomorrow at noon in Jacksonville!
 So nice of  greatly appreciated! 
 I will be speaking tonight (6:30 P.M.) at Trump National Doral in Miami. A big crowd expected - amazing people!
 Remember, official campaign merchandise (hats, apparel etc.) can only be bought at  Be careful, don't get ripped-off
 The young intern who accidentally did a Retweet apologizes.
 Joe, thanks for not running! 
 #ChrisWallace, who interviewed me on Sunday, had his highest ratings since Feb of '09. Congratulations! 
 Can u believe that Jeb Bush’s campaign manager is in Berlin, Germany looking for money? What’s he giving to Germany? 
 I think Joe Biden made correct decision for him & his family. Personally, I would rather run against Hillary because her record is so bad.
 The great workers who just completed the skylight at Trump International Hotel, D.C. (Old Post Office) 
 . was just voted the #1 hotel in Canada in Conde Nast Traveler’s prestigious Reader’s Choice Awards 
 New poll by ABC News/Washington Post  TRUMP 32  CARSON 22  RUBIO 10  BUSH 7  Wow, how will the media put a negative spin on this one?
 I will be interviewed on  Good Morning America at 7:00 A.M.  will be announcing new poll numbers. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Just out: Boston Herald/Franklin Pierce Poll  N.H.  TRUMP 28 (up 10)  CARSON 16  BUSH 9  RUBIO 6  CRUZ 5  Press will say they are surging!
 . at 7:00 A.M.
 . you were GREAT on  tonight. Thank you for the nice words!
 I will be interviewed on  Good Morning America tomorrow at 7:00 A.M. Big new ABC poll coming out - I hope I do well!
 . at 10:00.
 .  Had my best day ever in the polls, one had me at 41% - Morning Consult. Boston Globe, Monmouth, NBC and CNN all great. More!
 I will be interviewed on  tonight at 10:00. You will find it very interesting (I hope). Enjoy!
 Both Aberdeen and Turnberry in Scotland, and the soon to open Doonbeg in Ireland, blow Bandon Dunes away. Bandon is a toy by comparison!
 Lots of great new polls--big leads!  http://someotherlink.com/ 
 I will be on  tonight at 10 PM  #Hannity
 Bill Clinton wants to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Tonight's official count--7,943. An all time record for the Anderson Civic Center in SC! Thanks! #Trump2016 
 See, the attack  very possibly could have been stopped. We need real leadership and vision. 
 Via  "Under Fire From Donald Trump, Jeb Bush Focuses On 9/11 Even Though Hijackers Got Florida Licenses" 
 Interesting reading re September 11th 
 NEW POLL: Trump Blue Collar Support highest since FDR in 1930s--WOW! 
 Bruce Willis wearing my hat on  last Friday- 
 Jeb is fighting to defend a catastrophic event. I am fighting to make sure it doesn't happen again.Jeb is too soft-we need tougher & sharper
 It's really cold outside, they are calling it a major freeze, weeks ahead of normal. Man, we could use a big fat dose of global warming!
 Best thing my supporters can do if you don't like the way  and her puppets unfairly treat "us" is don't watch her show!
 Fox News Sunday With Chris Wallace will be re-broadcast on   at 6:00 P.M.
 Just reported by CNN that "the Trump halo effect"  caused a record-shattering Democratic Debate rating of 15.3 million viewers. So true!
 It's amazing that some of the dumbest people on television work for the Wall Street Journal, in particular a real dope named Charles Lane!
 I will be interviewed by Chris Wallace at 2:00 P.M. on  - Turn off the football for 15 minutes, Make America Great Again!
 Replay of Fox News Sunday With Chris Wallace at 2:00 P.M. on  Big statement made by Chris!
 I should release the sad and totally apologetic letter that Penn  hand delivered to me. Minds would be changed very fast!
 Does everyone remember    and his famous remarks about "self-deportation" and "47%". He was done. I don't need his angry advice!
 . and his campaign manager should not be critical of candidates after they blew an election that should never have been lost!
 .  can only speak negatively about my presidential chances because I have been openly hard on his terrible "choke" loss to Obama!
 .
 Jeb, why did your brother attack and destabalize the Middle East by attacking Iraq when there were no weapons of mass destruction? Bad info?
 This morning Chris Wallace has the best political show on television - but that's only because I'm on it (kidding)! Have fun.
 Jeb Bush should stop trying to defend his brother and focus on his own shortcomings and how to fix them. Also, Rubio is hitting him hard!
 On at 9:00A.M. or 10:00 A.M. (depending on your location)  on Fox is a tough but really good interview with Chris Wallace. Enjoy!
 Amazing! Thank you! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 Good news for those that want to Make America Great Again - I am winning every poll in every STATE and NATIONAL - and by big numbers! Thanks
 I will be interviewed on Fox News Sunday With Chris Wallace at 9:00 A.M. or 10:00 A.M. (depending on location). Will be tough but good!
 A great story in the New York Post ---really well written! 
 Russia and the world has already started to respect us again! 
 Via Business Insider: Donald Trump's Poll Dominance in 2 Key States is Mind-Blowing- 
 Via CNET: Donald Trump Bests Jeb Bush in Website Performance, Experts Say- 
 . is on the front page of the  waving to 200 people in New Hampshire. My crowd next door was 5,000 people – no pic!
 Thank you  for your very honest commentary. One thing, we do have great teams in IA, NH, SC and beyond. 
 . you did a fantastic job tonight on  Thank you for your very tough and very smart representation!
 . like it or not, our country needs more energy and spirit than you can provide! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 No  you’re pathetic for saying nothing happened during your brother’s term when the World Trade Center was attacked and came down.
 . At the debate you said your brother kept us safe- I wanted to be nice & did not mention the WTC came down during his watch, 9/11.
 In Massachusetts --- the place is packed! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Heading to Boston to see another huge crowd! My friend Tom Brady is a great competitor and golf partner. 
 Rumor has it that the grubby head of failing  Magazine, "Sloppy" Graydon Carter, is going to be fired or replaced very soon?
 A great new poll-33%! 
 Nice story from  
 .  Keep up the great work Scottie. Polls are best ever!
 . was FANTASTIC on  this morning. He may be my son but he is a special guy!
 . has just agreed that the debate will be TWO HOURS. Fantastic news for all, especially the millions of people who will be watching!
 I am interviewed tomorrow morning by  on  - 7:00 A.M. Will be very interesting!
 Every poll, Time, Drudge, Slate and others, said I won both debates - but heard Megyn Kelly had her two puppets say bad stuff. I don't watch
 . is a failed Bush speechwriter whose work was so bad that he has never been able to make a comeback. A third rate talent!
 Megyn Kelly has two really dumb puppets, Chris Stirewalt & Marc Threaten (a Bushy) who do exactly what she says. All polls say I won debates
 Will be on  tomorrow with  Enjoy!
 Why is the  being asked to do a debate that is so much longer than the just-aired and very boring #DemDebate?
 . is pushing the  around by asking for extra time (and no criteria) in order to sell more commercials.
 The  should not agree to the ridiculous debate terms that  is asking unless there is a major benefit to the party.
 . joined    & was asked about his thoughts on  #Trump2016 Thanks Kevin--so nice!
 A great day in New Jersey for Trump!  & 
 Signing my tax return.... 
 I'm very proud of my daughter Ivanka. Great interview. 
 Incredible crowd in Richmond, Virginia tonight! So much spirit and energy! #makeamericagreatagain 
 Just did  Will be back on at 11pm on 
 CNN Poll just out on South Carolina – great #’s 
 . did an excellent job of hosting the #DemDebate last night. Tough, firm, but fair.
 CNN/ORC Poll results just out for Nevada—WOW! Trump 38, Carson 22, Fiorina 8, Bush 6, Cruz 4 
 Steven Tyler got more publicity on his song request than he’s gotten in ten years. Good for him!
 Even though I have the legal right to use Steven Tyler’s song, he asked me not to. Have better one to take its place!
 Will be going to Richmond, Virginia today. Big crowd! See you there.
 The debate last night proved that Hillary is running against the “B” team. She won’t be so lucky when it comes to me!
 We need a strong leader- and fast! 
 #DemDebate was really boring but had a lot of fun live tweeting and picked up by far the most followers.
 Like her or not, Hillary did what she had to do in the debate last night—get through it. Her opponents were very gentle and soft!
 The latest book on Hillary—Wow, a really tough one!   
 Check out OAN and compare to what you are watching now!
 Wow, I am giving a speech on OAN. Much more exciting than debate!
 Notice that illegal immigrants will be given ObamaCare and free college tuition but nothing has been mentioned about our VETERANS #DemDebate
 Sanders said only black lives matter - wow! Hillary did not answer question!
 Sorry, there is no STAR on the stage tonight!
 Good move by Bernie S.
 The hardest thing Clinton has to do is defend her bad decision making including Iraq vote, e-mails etc.
 All are very scripted and rehearsed, two (at least) should not be on the stage.
 Who is winning the debate so far (just last name)? #DemDebate
 O'Malley, as former Mayor of Baltimore, has very little chance.
 Can anyone imagine Chafee as president? No way.
 The trade deal is a disaster, she was always for it! #DemDebate
 Get rid of all of these commercials. #DemDebate
 Putin is not feeling too nervous or scared.   #DemDebate
 We will all have fun and hopefully learn something tonight. I will shoot straight and call it as I see it, both the good and the bad. Enjoy!
 Should be interesting but too bad the three guys at《1% will be taking up so much time -  but who knows, maybe a star will be born (unlikely)
 Live from New York- November 7th!  
 It was just announced that I will be hosting Saturday Night Live on Nov. 7th --  look forward to it! 
 How can Jeb Bush expect to deal with China, Russia + Iran if he gets caught doing a “plant” during my speech yesterday in NH?
 So nice, thank you very much. 
 Everybody's talking about my doing twitter during the likely very boring debate tonight.  #DemDebate
 Very honored: "Trump Is Tops As Clinton Drops In Connecticut Primaries, Quinnipiac University Poll Finds" 
 The arrogant young woman who questioned me in such a nasty fashion at No Labels yesterday was a Jeb staffer! HOW CAN HE BEAT RUSSIA & CHINA?
 Sheldon Adelson is looking to give big dollars to Rubio because he feels he can mold him into his perfect little puppet. I agree!
 Someone should inform  that, despite spending millions of $'s on graphics, it is not the Democratic Debate, rather the Democrat (s) D!
 At the request of many, and even though I expect it to be a very boring two hours, I will be covering the Democrat Debate live on twitter!
 Will be interviewed by  on  at 10PM tonight. Enjoy!
 Thank you. 
 Via RealClear Politics 
 Leaving soon after a great time in New Hampshire, a truly special place!
 Great, everyone is saying I did much better on   last week than President Obama did tonight. I agree!
 President Obama was terrible on  tonight. He said CLIMATE CHANGE is the most important thing, not all of the current disasters!
 I will be on Face The Nation (CBS) today at 10:30 A.M. and Media Buzz (Fox News) at 11:00 A.M. Enjoy!
 Just got back from Georgia. The crowds and love for U.S. was so amazing! We all had a great day together - will be back soon!
 Little Barry Diller, who lost a fortune on Newsweek and Daily Beast, only writes badly about me. He is a sad and pathetic figure. Lives lie!
 Via Breitbart - "Riding High in Polls Donald Trump Storms the American South to Overflow Crowds in Georgia" 
 With the fantastic ratings last weekend,  &  I think it’s only fair that I go on  w/ Chris Wallace.
 Will be interviewed on  with  tomorrow at 10:30am EST. Enjoy!
 My interview with  on #MediaBuzz will air tomorrow on  at 11am and 5pm. Great job Howie, very insightful.
 . with  had fantastic numbers last Sunday --- Trump interview. Nice!
 Thank you Georgia! I had a great afternoon with all of you! I will be back soon. #MakeAmerciaGreatAgain 
 . just informed us that my interview last week on  was their highest rated show in 4 years. Congrats!
 I'm leading big in every poll and we are going to WIN! Remember, Trump NEVER gives up!
 Paul Ryan is far from my first choice, but a very nice guy. The Republicans should go for tough and (very) smart this time - no games!
 Heading for Atlanta tomorrow morning for noon speech at North Atlanta Trade Center. Big crowds, great people!
 Will be interviewed on "Media Buzz" with Howie Kurtz on Fox, Sunday at 11:00 A.M.
 Great Gravis Poll on the great state of NH. Also, watch  on CBS &  #mediabuzz -- both on Sunday.
 Mark--They could use you. 
 Good luck to the US Men’s National Team in tomorrow’s CONCACAF Cup vs. Mexico!  It should be a great game! 
 New Gravis Poll in NH just out:  Trump 32%, Carson 13% 
 Crowd gathers to hear Trump speech in Las Vegas 
 Thank you. 
 True. Thanks. 
 Thanks. 
 I will be going to Atlanta, Georgia tomorrow—here’s the info:  Hope to see you there! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 I will be interviewed on  Sunday 10AM on CBS.  is a true pro!
 Thanks Larry. Best wishes. 
 Good luck! Enjoy. 
 Will be interviewed on  at 7:20. Great crowd in Las Vegas yesterday!
 I was so happy when I heard that  one of the most dishonest political outlets, is losing a fortune. Pure scum!
 . ran  into the ground. A change was necessary. Congratulations to  and good luck in the future!
 . is a total low life--- read his past tweets. A dummy with no “it” factor. Will fade fast.
 A great event in Las Vegas, Nevada! 
 Just leaving Las Vegas. Unbelievable crowd! Many Hispanics who love me and I love them! 
 Thank you! 
 Thanks. 
 Website Exposing Marco ‘Amnesty’ Rubio Goes Live: A ‘Donor Class Puppet’? - Breitbart 
 Washington (D.C.) is such a mess - nothing works! I will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!  It's not going to happen with anyone else.
 Great, Kevin McCarthy drops out of SPEAKER race. We need a really smart and really tough person to take over this very  important job!
 I'm at Trump Int'l Hotel in Las Vegas, tallest/most beautiful building in town. Speaking to another great crowd at Treasure Island (12 noon)
 What a time we all had in Iowa yesterday, massive overflow crowd. Love them!
 Wow, great news! I hear  of Red State was fired like a dog. If you read his tweets, you'll understand why. Just doesn't have IT!
 I hear  is in big trouble. Unlike me, his viewers & ratings are way down & he has become irrelevant—glad I didn’t do his show.
 Wacky  who always seems to be crying (worse than Boehner) speaks badly of me only because I refuse to do his show--a real nut job!
 Just arrived in Las Vegas for a packed house speech tomorrow. Big poll results today, Leading big everywhere. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Iowa was amazing today. Great crowd, great people. Thanks, will be back soon!
 . made some of the dumbest political decisions of all time in helping Romney to get destroyed by Obama. Should have won!
 Just found out I won the Rockingham County Republican Booth Straw Poll at the Deerfield Fair in New Hampshire this past weekend. 39% ---Wow!
 . has no power,  but so dishonest!
 I wonder why somebody doesn't do something about the clowns  and their totally dishonest reporting.
 Heading to a packed house in Waterloo, Iowa! Will celebrate today's great poll numbers together. See you soon!
 If Stuart Stevens' book is as bad as his horrible political advice to Mitt Romney, don't waste your money. Arrogant guy but a zero!
 Ben Carson was speaking in general terms as to what he would do if confronted with a gunman, and was not criticizing the victims. Not fair!
 True! 
 I will be on  with  tonight at 6PM. 
 Crooked  has given up advertising in Iowa on me—remember they wanted my million dollars—I said no—total frauds!
 .  Wayne, such a pleasant surprise--so nice. Thank you very much.
 I will be interviewed on  New Day at 7:03 A.M. Enjoy!
 Don't ever forget, we will, together, MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 So, so, so important - MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Political strategist Stuart Stevens,who led Romney down the tubes in what should have been an easy victory,has terrible political instincts!
 Thoughts and prayers for those in the floods affecting the great people of South Carolina.
 The incompetence of our current administration is beyond comprehension. TPP is a terrible deal.
 For all of my fantastic  supporters, and for the U.S.A., we are going to win and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, maybe greater than ever before!
 I'm leading by big margins in every poll but the press keeps asking, would you ever get out? They are just troublemakers, I'm going to win!
 Will be interviewed by  on  at 10:30 A.M.
 Will be interviewed by  on     at 10:00 A.M.
 The people of Tennessee yesterday were amazing. Thank you!
 Will be interviewed on  at 8:30.
 Tune in to see me on  with  at 10am ET. Enjoy!
 I will be on  with  tomorrow morning at 10:30am ET on  Enjoy!
 Just leaving Nashville, Tennessee. Had a great time with a fabulous crowd of people! Love Nashville -- back soon! 
 Rubio was very disloyal to Bush, his mentor, when he decided to run against him. Both said they "love" each other.They don't - word is hate!
 Bush and Rubio are finally attacking each other, as I knew they would, in order to be the last "establishment" man standing against me.Great
 Thank you  for the nice things you said about Melania. You will like her, great heart and smart - always wanting to help people!
 Pictures of my beautiful mother, amazing father, and family hanging  in upstate, New York. 
 Congratulations to my brother Robert & Ann Marie on the success of  in Dutchess County, New York (Amenia.) Great food!
 Will be in Nashville, Tennessee, tomorrow (Saturday) at 2:30 P.M. So much to talk about - see you there!
 I was so looking forward to being in Virginia Beach, Virginia, today. The demand for tickets was amazing. Good luck with storm, back soon!
 My warmest condolences to the families of the horrible Roseburg, Oregon, shootings.
 I will be interviewed on  tonight at 10:00. Many things, mostly bad, to talk about!
 . is trying to hit back at me because I'm saying that he let the Repub Party down w/ his loss to Obama. Should've won—he choked!
 Thanks. 
 Just got back from New Hampshire. Great crowd, great people! Will be back soon!
 I will be interviewed by  tonight on  at 10PM.
 Interesting, polls on who won the GOP debate. 
 With  a great guy, at our 20,000 people event in Oklahoma last week. 
 Wow, so nice! Thank you Wayne Allyn Root. 
 Great news! Just out--the highly respected USA Today/Suffolk University Poll. Enjoy! 
 Anyone reading this profile of Marco Rubio would never vote for him. Never made ten cents & is totally controlled! 
 Highly respected economist  is a big fan of my tax plan—thank you Larry. 
 Rubio is totally owned by the lobbyists and special interests. A lightweight senator with the worst voting record in Senate. Lazy!
 Just read that "Trump" has the largest (and I add most enthusiastic) crowds. Tonight I will be in New Hampshire - the place will be packed!
 I watched lightweight Senator  Marco Rubio, who is all talk and no action, defend his WEAK position on illegal immigration. Pathetic!
 Great! 
 Carl Icahn said this about me:  "I think at this moment in time, he’s the only candidate that speaks out about the country’s problems."
 Definitely watch  ‘s ‘Danger Ahead’. Very insightful, particularly on how corp inversions hurt America: 
 I hope when Rand Paul gets out of the race—he is at 1%--his supporters come over to me. I will do a much better job for them.
 Prediction: Rand Paul has been driven out of the race by my statements about him-- he will announce soon. 1%!
 Do you believe this - Iran wants to trade our 3 prisoners (not 4) for 19 prisoners held by the U.S. Should have been let go with last deal!
 Wow, the ratings for  last night were their biggest in a year--- very nice!
 Zogby Poll: Trump Widens Lead After GOP Debate 
 Conservative? Jeb Bush doubled Florida State debt! 
 Will be doing  with  tonight at 7 pm re: tax reductions and various other topics.
 Thanks.  http://someotherlink.com/
 I know you will enjoy reading my tax plan-  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 LIVE on #Periscope: Tax Plan Press Conference #Trump2016 
 Looking forward to press conference on taxes at 11AM at 
 Hope we all enjoy   tomorrow night. I do believe they will treat me fairly!
 Marco Rubio is a member of the Gang Of Eight or, very weak on stopping illegal immigration. Only changed when poll numbers crashed.
 Lightweight Senator Marco Rubio is VERY weak on immigration, knows nothing about finance and would be incapable of making great trade deals!
 An updated POLL tracker (with all polls thru the weekend) reveals I maintained a double digit lead at… 
 Just left Oklahoma--- the most amazing crowd and people! What a night!
 Thank you  
 I will be on   this Sunday. A great honor-- hope you enjoy it.
 . "The Donald Trump Ratings Bump: Who's Benefiting Most?" 
 . Trump on Boehner resignation: 'It's a good thing' 
 .....Has worst attendance record in Senate- rarely there to vote on a bill! 
 . is weak on illegal immigration and will allow anyone into the country.....
 Dishonest  just called to say that none of the polls including Fox, NBC, CNN, Zogby, & Morning Consult matter. Serious haters.
 At the Old Post Office- 
 I am now inspecting the Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue - will be a great hotel. Soon off to the Oklahoma State Fair!
 .....Ahead of schedule and under budget! Will be in Oklahoma tonight!
 Great reception in D.C. At the Values Voter Summit. Now checking on my job at the Old Post Office...
 . the    poll said very plainly I came in second in the debate. All others, Time, Drudge, Slate etc. said I came in 1st.
 Just watched  on television. Just another all talk, no action, politician. Truly doesn't have a clue! Worst voting record in Sen.
 Wow, a really nice lead in New Hampshire--- an increase since my last poll! 
 The failing  news outlet, which I hear is losing lots of money, is really dishonest!
 . which is not read or respected by many, may be the most dishonest of the media outlets--- and that is saying something.
 Dishonest  reporter Jonathan Martin refused to acknowledge massive crowd surge forward… 
 Bloomberg: Trump leads GOP field 
 Despite the establishment and the media’s best efforts, the people are speaking loudly and clearly. Thank you to my amazing supporters!
 New Bloomberg Poll: Trump Leads Big 
 So happy about my daughter  announcement that she will be having a baby this spring. Congratulations!
 Will be on  at 6:30 A.M.
 Will be on  at 7:00 A.M.
 . owes me an apology for allowing clueless pundit  to use such foul language on TV. Unheard of!
 Incompetent  lost it tonight on  He should not be allowed on TV and the FCC should fine him!
 Wow! What a great night. Thank you to all of the viewers and congratulations to   
 . has been treating me very unfairly & I have therefore decided that I won't be doing any more Fox shows for the foreseeable future.
 Yogi Berra was not only a great baseball player, he was a great guy. Yogi will be missed. 
 Headline reads" Rubio passes Bush in Florida poll" -- Unfair, because Trump destroys them both! Trump 31.5%, Rubio 19.2%, Bush 11.3%
 .  Congratulations on your great win--what a captain, what a champion!
 I will be doing  at 11:30 on CBS. Enjoy! 
 I will be the featured guest on the season opener of   this Sunday. There certainly is plenty to talk about!
 Just remember, the birther movement was started by Hillary Clinton in 2008. She was all in!
 I think  should take another eleven day "unscheduled" vacation.
 Do you ever notice that lightweight  constantly goes after me but when I hit back it is totally  sexist. She is highly overrated!
 Senator Marco "amnesty" Rubio, who has worst voting record in Senate, just hit me on national security-but I said don't go into Iraq. VISION
 I will be on the  tonight at 11:30 
 Yom Kippur blessings to all of my friends in Israel and around the world. #YomKippur
 Morning Consult poll: "Trump Leads" 
 2016 Republican Primary Morning Consult Poll was just released. TRUMP 32, CARSON 12, BUSH 11, FIORINA 6, RUBIO 5, CRUZ 5. Taken after debate
 . is truly one of the dumbest of the talking  heads - he doesn't have a clue!
 I am having a really hard time watching 
 . why don't you have some knowledgeable talking heads on your show for a change instead of the same old Trump haters. Boring!
 . was very negative to me in refusing to to post the great polls that came out today including NBC.  not good for me!
 Via HuffPost Pollster #1 
 I will be interviewed tonight at 7pm ET by  #OnTheRecord
 I got to know  well—he’s a very nice person and has a great future.
 Thank you Dan--I agree! Best wishes. 
 #AskTrump  
 I had a great time at  #AskTrump 
 I just wrapped up a Q&A  Thanks for all your questions! #AskTrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 . #asktrump 
 #AskTrump Getting ready to answer your questions. 
 Has the media picked up the new Zogby poll that was just put out? I doubt it! 
 Jeb has been confused for forty years- 
 Carly Fiorina is terrible at business--the last thing our country needs! 
 #AskTrump Send me your questions to answer live from  later this afternoon.
 New Zogby poll— highly respected— but the media won’t report it because it gives me an even bigger lead! 
 The  refused to use their just in poll numbers where I have a massive lead but instead used  numbers where my lead is smaller.
 Will be on   now. Enjoy!
 Carly Fiorina did such a horrible job at Lucent and HP, virtually destroying both companies, that she never got another CEO job offer! Pres.
 We are going to WIN and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, maybe better than ever before!
 I am attracting the biggest crowds, by far, and the best poll numbers, also by far.   Much of the media is totally dishonest. So sad!
 I have been leading big in all  polls, with two more today,  and  The NBC poll is more than double next,  at 29%. Fiorina has 11%.
 There is no way that Carly  Fiorina can become the Republican Nominee or win against the Dems. Boxer killed her for Senate in California!
 I will be on  at 10:30.  will be releasing their new poll numbers. Based on the debate results, I should do well-who knows?
 Thank you Faith and Freedom Forum &  I had a great time in Iowa today! 
 A great night in Iowa! 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 On my way to Iowa. Will be landing in Des Moines in two hours. See ya!
 Christians need support in our country (and around the world), their religious liberty is at stake! Obama has been horrible, I will be great
 If I would have challenged the man, the media would have accused me of interfering with that man's right of free speech. A no win situation!
 If someone made a nasty or controversial statement about me to the president, do you really think he would come to my rescue? No chance!
 This is the first time in my life that I have caused controversy by NOT saying something.
 Am I morally obligated to defend the president every time somebody says something bad or controversial about him? I don't think so!
 Looking forward to meeting the students of Urbandale High School tomorrow- 
 I’ve just released my position papers on The Second Amendment. 
 Thank you. 
 GIVE AMERICA BACK ITS DREAM!     -- Donald J. Trump
 Wow, great post-debate poll: "Trump Increases Lead" via Breitbart 
 Would be really bad if columnist Mike Lupica left the   A wonderful and talented guy!
 Will be interviewed tonight by  on  at 10 PM. Enjoy!
 Going to New Hampshire in a little while. Big crowds! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 Every poll done on debate last night, from Drudge to Newsmax to Time Magazine, had me winning in a landslide. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 Just announced that in the history of  last night’s debate was its highest rated ever. Will they send me flowers & a thank you note?
 #CNNDebate 
 #CNNDebate 
 The #CNNDebate was amazing --- so much fun! 
 #CNNDebate Winning the  poll- 
 Thank you to Tom Brady, Coach Ditka, Coach Bobby Knight and all of the many champions that have been so supportive!
 A great honor from somebody that knows how to win! 
 Will be heading over to the debate soon. Can you believe  is "milking" it for almost 3 hours? Too long, too many people on stage!
 I hope Arnold S. does well with the Apprentice because he is a nice guy and also, because I get a big percentage of the profits!
 Just finished the wonderful event on the U.S.S. Iowa. VETERANS FOR A STRONG AMERICA endorsed me. Such a great honor, thank you!
 . Rush, I am in LA inspecting property (big job creator) & listening to you. You are truly fantastic--thanks!
 The polls are really looking good—#1 everywhere despite all lobbyist & special interest $ being spent against me. I’m turning down millions.
 Everyone is talking about the incredible event we had in Dallas last night. Spectacular crowd & arena! Thank you 
 . asked me for $1 million. I said no. Now falsely advertising that I will raise taxes. I’ll lower big league for middle class.
 My plan will lower taxes for our country, not raise them. Phony  says I will raise taxes—just another lie.
 Little respected Club For Growth asked me for $1,000,000 - I said "NO". Now they are spending lobbyist and special interest money on ads!
 Am now in L.A. Will be going to the U.S.S. IOWA at 5:30 P.M. to speak to our great VETERANS and other friends!
 Our vets are treated like 3rd class citizens. Enough! Join me &  on  at LA Waterfront to hear my plan for vets & the military!
 Loved Dallas and the tremendous crowd last night. Will be back!
 I will rebuild the military, take care of vets and make the world respect the US again! Join me today. Info: 
 If you’re a veteran in Los Angeles, I want you to join me and  today 9/15 on  Sign up here! 
 Speech in Dallas went really well. Big and wonderful crowd. Just arrived in L.A. Big day tomorrow!
 Unbelievable crowd in Dallas! 
 Vets mistreated, NO border security? I’m with  this Tuesday 9/15 to #MakeAmericasMilitaryGreatAgain! Join us! 
 The event with me and  in L.A on 9/15 is turning out to be huge. Get your tickets before they're gone 
 Looking forward to joining  Tuesday 9/15 in L.A. aboard the  - The Battleship of Presidents! Join us! 
 My opponents big bosses--lobbyists and donors--are trying to do damage. They will fail! Money down the drain!
 Thanks Mark, will be fun. 
 To all my fans, sorry I couldn’t do The Apprentice any longer—but equal time (presidential run) prohibits me from doing so. Love!
 Congrats to my friend  who is doing next season’s  Celebrity Apprentice. He'll be great & will raise lots of $ for charity.
 My honor, thank you. 
 Why is someone like George Pataki, who did a terrible job as Governor of N.Y. and registers ZERO in the polls, allowed on the debate stage?
 Had a record crowd in Boone, Iowa. A fantastic day--- we will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 I am having a great time in Iowa at Jack Trice Stadium! Unbelievable people.
 Too many people on stage for debate.  at 11th, with 2% in  shouldn't be allowed to participate.
 I truly understood the appeal of Ron Paul, but his son,  didn't get the right gene.
 Lightweight Senator  should focus on trying to get elected in Kentucky--- a great state which is embarrassed by him.
 Donald Trump Sends  to Highest Friday Rating in 18 Months.  that is #HUGE! 
 Trump’s Campaign Hat Becomes an Ironic Summer Accessory - The New York Times. 
 . thank you so much for your kind words on television -- fantastic job and greatly appreciated!
 Will be on  at 8:00. Enjoy!
 Backstage with  before opening skit- great fun!  
 The Tonight Show  will be amazing - 11:30 P.M.  ENJOY!
 Amazing crowd outside  Tune in tonight at 11:30. 
 . is a terrific guy and I wish him well- I know he will have a great future!
 On  with  at 11:30 PM. Enjoy!
 Via The Hill "No Tickets Left for Trump's Dallas Rally" 
 . I greatly appreciate your kind words last night on  Have great love for the evangelicals -- great respect for you.
 Just purchased NBC’s half of The Miss Universe Organization and settled all lawsuits against them. Now own 100% -- stay tuned!
 Let’s all take a moment to remember all of the heroes from a very tragic day that we cannot let happen again!
 Oh wow, lightweight Governor  who is registered at less than 1 percent in the polls, just mocked my hair. So original!
 Also, tomorrow night I will be going to Boone and Ames. Really look forward to seeing all of my friends in Iowa.
 Very good news—the new Quinnipiac poll just came out—I am #1 in Iowa.
 I will be on The Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon tonight at 11:30. Should be fun! 
 .... I only respond to people that register more than 1% in the polls. I never thought he had a chance and I’ve been proven right.
 Bobby Jindal did not make the debate stage and therefore I have never met him….
 I'll be on  ON THE RECORD tonight at 7 PM
 Wow, I am ahead of the field with Evangelicals (am so proud of this) and virtually every other group, and Ben Carson just took a swipe at me
 I had a great day in D.C. even though the subject was an unpleasant one, the horrible Iran Nuke deal. Amazing crowd and enthusiasm!
 Man did JEB throw his brother under the bus last night on  . Probably true, but not nice!
 I will be speaking at the #StopIranDeal rally shortly- watch live here- 
 A letter to  President Jeff Zucker- 
 See you in D.C. tomorrow at 1:00 P.M. at the Capitol to protest the horribly negotiated deal with Iran. Really sad!
 Via  "Amateur hour with the Iran nuclear deal" 
 Will be on Bill O'Reilly  tonight at 8 PM. Enjoy!
 A great honor to receive polling numbers like these. Record setting African American (25%) & Hispanic numbers (31%). 
 I'm on Bill  tonight at 8 PM. It will be another lively interview about how to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 Jeb’s policies in Florida helped lead to its almost total collapse. Right after he left he went to work for Lehman Brothers—wow!
 The lobbyists & special interests have just put out an ad for Jeb which hits me "just a little" but is very false!
 I’m self funding my campaign but lobbyists & special interests for Jeb & others are starting to do big ads—desperate! Don’t believe them.
 Wake up Jeb supporters! 
 Thank you  for your strength & wonderful words last night on  but  is easy to beat!
 Wow! Such nice words from Robert Redford on my running for President. Thank you, Robert. 
 Tomorrow in DC: 1 PM West Front Lawn of the Capitol. Not even believable that we would do this deal with Iran.
 Look forward to being in DC tomorrow—big crowd expected for our protest against the truly stupid nuclear deal we are making with Iran.
 Looking forward to being with  at our big rally in D.C. on Wednesday (1:00 P.M. at the Capitol) to protest insane Iran nuke deal!
 Both Washington D.C. and DALLAS are turning out to be really big events. D.C. is protest of incompetent Iran deal and Dallas is big speech!
 Remember, I'll see you in D.C. at the Capitol Building on Wednesday at 1:00 o'clock. Then Dallas on Sept.14 at 6:00 P.M. American Air Center
 Thank you  for your powerful words on  I am with the Evangelicals and Tea Party big time. We will all WIN  together!
 . should release the letter they sent me asking for $1,000,000. When I said no, they came out against me. A scam operation?
 I will be in Washington D.C. on Wednesday,1 P.M.,in front of the Capitol, to protest the horrible and incompetent deal being made with Iran.
 The Dallas event on September 14 at 6:00 P.M. at the American Airlines Center looks like it will be a giant success. Tickets are going FAST!
 Our country needs a president with great leadership skills and vision, not someone like Hillary or Barack, neither of which has a clue!
 The phony Club For Growth, which asked me in writing for $1,000,000 (I said no), is now wanting to do negative ads on me. Total hypocrites!
 If the presidential election were held today, according to this  poll, Donald Trump would defeat any Dem: 
 The hedge fund guys (gals) have to pay higher taxes ASAP. They are paying practically nothing. We must reduce taxes for the middle class!
 By self-funding my campaign, I am not controlled by my donors, special interests or lobbyists. I am only working for the people of the U.S.!
 Remember that I am self-funding my campaign. Hillary, Jeb and the rest are spending special interest and lobbyist money.100% CONTROLLED
 Hillary said such nasty things about me, read directly off her teleprompter...but there was no emotion, no truth. Just can't read speeches!
 Hillary Clinton made a speech today using the biggest teleprompter I have ever seen. In fact, it wasn't even see through glass, it was black
 Saudi Arabia was "vehemently" against the Iran nuclear deal. Then today they embraced it. What happened? What did we give them to endorse?
 Wow, the Dallas event in two weeks looks like a big winner! Get your tickets (American Airlines Center) FAST!
 Just announced that because of "Trump", advertising rates for debate on  are going from $5000 to $200,000, a 4000% increase.PAY CHARITY?
 Why would a very low ratings radio talk show host like Hugh Hewitt be doing the next debate on  He is just a 3rd rate "gotcha" guy!
 Very low ratings radio host Hugh Hewitt asked me about Suleiman, Abu Bake al-Baghdad, Hassan Nasrallah and more - typical "gotcha" questions
 The Dallas event in two weeks, at the American Airlines Center, is filling up fast. Get your tickets fast,  before it is too late!
 . was terrible on  yesterday. Angry and obnoxious, she will never make it on T.V.  can do so much better!
 Terrific response to my previous tweet: "I’ll be in Dallas at the American Airlines Center on Sept 14th at 6 PM."  …
 So nice, thank you Laura. 
 Daily Caller: Trump Surpasses Field, Flirts With 40 Percent in Alabama Poll 
 I’ll be in Dallas at the American Airlines Center on Sept 14th at 6 PM.  Will be great to be back in Texas. 
 Will be on  in 5 minutes - at 7:00. Enjoy!
 The Pledge #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 LIVE on #Periscope: Watch major press conference live from  now! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Congratulations to Tom Brady on yet another great victory- Tom is my friend and a total winner!
 The deal with Iran will go down as one of the most incompetent ever made. The U.S. lost on virtually every point. We just don't win anymore!
 . I am in first place by a lot in all polls, tied for first place with Ben Carson in one Iowa poll. I thought you knew this-thanks
 Tracking 149 polls from 29 pollsters nationwide/HuffPost Pollster #GOP 
 2016 GOP Nomination Polls have me as #1 as seen on  with  
 . Great job on  this morning. You tell it like it is! Also, thx for the nice mention. Your book sounds great!
 A terrible deal with Iran! 
 Will be interviewed on  this morning at 7:00. Thanks for the GREAT poll results!
 When I intelligently turned down The Club For Growth crazy request for $1,000,000, they got nasty.What a waste of money that would have been
 The president of the pathetic Club For Growth came to my office in N.Y.C. and asked for a ridiculous $1,000,000 contribution. I said no way!
 Every Poll has me winning BIG.If you listen to dopey Karl Rove, a Trump hater, on  you would think I'm doing poorly. 
 Why does  and  always have Karl Rove on. He spent $430 million and lost ALL races. A dope who said Romney won election
 I’m turning down millions of dollars of campaign contributions—feel totally stupid doing so, but hope it is appreciated by the voters.
 Many Super Pacs, funded by groups that want total control over their candidate, are being formed to “attack” Trump. Remember when u see them
 No more Clintons or Bushes! 
 Congrats everyone--we topped 4 million today on Twitter--and heading up fast!
 While millions are being spent against me in attack ads, they are paid for by the “bosses” and “owners” of candidates. I am self funding.
 Jeb is spending millions of dollars on “hit” ads funded by lobbyists & special interests. Bad system.
 Yet another weak hit by a candidate with a failing campaign. Will Jeb sink as low in the polls as the others who have gone after me?
 The just released Public Policy Polling (PPP - national result) is the best yet. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Just out - new PPP NATIONAL POLL has me in first place by a wide margin at 29%. I wonder why only  has not reported this? Too bad!
 150 Clinton E-mails still contain classified information. More sensitive when she was Sec.of State. This is a very big deal.
 President Obama wants to change the name of Mt. McKinley to Denali after more than 100 years. Great insult to Ohio. I will change back!
 Very proud of Trump Int'l Golf Links in Aberdeen, Scotland. Just got the five star award from  
 See, I told you so 
 This is no "act of love" as Jeb Bush said… 
 For those that don’t think a wall (fence) works, why don’t they suggest taking down the fence around the White House? Foolish people!
 Huma Abedin, the top aide to Hillary Clinton and the wife of perv sleazebag Anthony Wiener, was a major security risk as a collector of info
 Leading in the Bloomberg Iowa poll. Also, my favorability numbers went up at a record, almost unheard of, clip. Thank you Iowa!
 Loved being with my many friends in Tennessee. The crowd and enthusiasm was fantastic. I won the straw poll big!
 Via  "TRUMP WINS NASHVILLE GRASSROOTS STRAW POLL WITH 52 PERCENT"- 
 Wow, Jeb Bush just lost three of his top fundraisers - they quit!
 Leaving now for Tennessee. Big crowd!
 Great rally last night in Massachusetts. 2000 people at a house - must be a record! Unbelievable spirit to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN.
 Will be interviewed by  tonight at 10:00 on OAN Network. Enjoy!
 Thank you  
 A phony story that I am trying to buy a soccer team in Argentina is untrue. Never even heard of the team—no interest! 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain From my speech in South Carolina yesterday- 
 Via CNN: Trump now leads in odds to win GOP nomination 
 Great job tonight on  Tony. I am with you all the way! Make America Great Again  
 Will be interviewed on  at 7:00 A.M. So much to talk about!
 The crowd in South Carolina was amazing. We set records and had a great time. Will be back soon.
 Who wants the endorsement of a guy ( who lost in perhaps the greatest upset in the history of Congress?
 . just watched you on  Thank you for your nice comments.
 The press has very inaccurately covered this event - see for yourself! 
 Great job on  tonight  We are all proud of you! Also, congrats on a great son - he is going places.
 . You were absolutely great on  Thank you.
 . Thanks for the nice words. You are fantastic!
 Thank you Christian Broadcasting Network    
 Will be interviewed on the  this morning at 7:00. Talking about politics, polls and whatever. Enjoy!
 Just got back from Iowa. Fantastic evening with truly fabulous people. Will be back again soon. Thanks!
 Heading to Iowa to a packed house. Just released polls, all first place, are amazing. Thank you!
 Thank you  I am going to Make America Great Again!
 Great American heroes who averted an attack in France. THANK YOU! Spencer Stone, Anthony Sadler, & Alex Skarlatos. 
 True, thanks. 
 Thanks. 
 Another good poll result in the great state of SC. Trump at 30%. Carson at 15% and Bush at 9%. 
 Congrats  You just got 4 points in your home state of SC—far better than zero nationally. You’re only 26 pts behind me.
 . did a terrible job as Governor of New York. If he ran again, he would have lost in a landslide. He and Graham ZERO in polls
 Jeb Bush just talked about my border proposal to build a "fence." It's not a fence, Jeb, it's a WALL, and there's a BIG difference!
 Asians are very offended that JEB said that anchor babies applies to them as a way to be more politically correct to hispanics. A mess!
 In a clumsy move to get out of his "anchor babies" dilemma, where he signed that he would not use the term and now uses it, he blamed ASIANS
 Jeb Bush never uses his last name on advertising, signage, materials etc. Is he ashamed of the name BUSH? A pretty sad situation. Go Jeb!
 I liked The Kelly File much better without  Perhaps she could take another eleven day unscheduled vacation!
 . must have had a terrible vacation, she is really off her game. Was afraid to confront Dr. Cornel West. No clue on immigration!
 Via The Brody File: "The Lesson Evangelicals Can Learn From Donald Trump"  Thank you David & CBN News--so nice. 
 Via Int'l Business Times: Jeb Bush Got $1.3M Job at Lehman After Florida Shifted Pension Cash To Bank. 
 Thank you Greta. 
 Even Barbara Bush agrees with me- 
 Depression- be careful of China! 
 Markets are crashing - all caused by poor planning and allowing China and Asia to dictate the agenda. This could get very messy! Vote Trump.
 As I have long stated, we are so tied in with China and Asia that their markets are now taking the U.S. market down. Get smart U.S.A.
 New Reuters Poll just came out and has me at 32%, highest number yet.The silent majority is back and we will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 The last thing we need is another Bush in the White House. Would be the same old thing (remember "read my lips, no more taxes"). GREATNESS!
 Jeb Bush has a photoshopped photo for an ad which gives him a black left hand and much different looking body. Jeb just can't get it right!
 Jeb Bush is weak on illegal immigration, in favor of common core, bad on women's health issues and thinks the Iraq war was a good thing.
 Now that I started my war on illegal immigration and securing the border, most other candidates are finally  speaking up. Just politicians!
 It has just been confirmed by  the City of Mobile, Alabama, that there were 30,000 people at last nights event, making it  #1for pol season.
 How is Bernie Sanders going to defend our country if he can't even defend his own microphone? Very sad!
 Thank you to the  for the accurate and very discriptive  story on my speech in Alabama last night. It was a great evening!
 I had 15,000 people in Phoenix but  said "the rooms capacity is just over 2000." But said Bernie  Sanders had 11,000 in same room.
 . covers me more inaccurately than any other media source, and that is saying something. They go out of their way to distort truth!
 Alabama was great last night, amazing people. 30,000 folks  was largest crowd of political season. Nice!
 . You did a great job hosting  Everybody loved it! Thank you for the nice words.
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #TrumpRallyAL 
 Dow dives more than 500 points - down 9% from high. Be careful!
 Leaving for Mobile, Alabama, right now - can't be late!
 Boston incident is terrible. We need energy and passion, but we must treat each other with respect. I would never condone violence.
 Great! 
 We are going to have a wild time in Alabama tonight! Finally, the silent majority is back! 
 How crazy - 7.5% of all births in U.S. are to illegal immigrants, over 300,000 babies per year. This must stop. Unaffordable and not right!
 Jeb Bush signed memo saying not to use the term "anchor babies," offensive. Now he wants to use it because I use it. Stay true to yourself!
 Alabama will shine tomorrow. It will be a big and glorious day!
 We are going to make our country so strong again, so great again. No more ripping off the United States. We will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 . please correct your story tonight. The public is fed-up with bad reporting for the sake of sensationalizing something!
 . cannot report the news truthfully. Why not apologize for your fraudulent story on World News Tonight.Gang members & criminals
  must apologize. My statement "we're going to get them out so fast, so quick" applied to hard core criminals & gang members. LIE
 Behind the scenes video with “Uncle Sam” (eagle’s name) and me. 
 Had a special visitor in my office yesterday for  photo shoot. 
 On the cover of  Magazine—a great honor! 
 Thank you New Hampshire! Together we will Make America Great Again! 
 Another great poll result! Thank you! 
 Just got back from New Hampshire. Amazing people, we all had a great time together!
 Will be in New Hampshire and then on  Special at 9 PM tonight.
 My official #MakeAmericaGreatAgain hat is now available online. To shop please visit  -- it is selling fast!
 . - Thank you and great job on  tonight!
 I am looking forward to being in New Hampshire tomorrow. The silent majority is taking our country back. We will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 My H-1B reform plan will transform program so it delivers for country, not lobbyists, & will have bipartisan support: 
 If I am elected President I will immediately approve the Keystone XL pipeline.  No impact on environment & lots of jobs for U.S.
 .  I am very proud of my sister, your story was terrific. Thank you so much.
 Our online campaign store is open! Visit  for #MakeAmericaGreatAgain merchandise including my signature hat!
 When foreigners attend our great colleges & want to stay in the U.S., they should not be thrown out of our country.
 I want talented people to come into this country—to work hard and to become citizens. Silicon Valley needs engineers, etc.
 It does matter! 
 My official #MakeAmericaGreatAgain hat is now available online. To shop please visit  --- it is selling fast!
 Listening to  on way back to Jury Duty. Fantastic show, terrific guy!
 Why does  keep George Will as a talking head? Wrong on so many subjects!
 The polls have been really amazing--we are all tired of incompetent politicians and bad deals! 
 I really enjoyed being at the Iowa State Fair. The crowds, love and enthusiasm is something I will never forget.
 .  Your father is a brilliant man with wonderful sense -- therefore, you must be good!
 Just got back from the Iowa State Fair. Record crowds, phenomenal people. Thank you IOWA, I will never let you down!
 LIVE on #Periscope: Good morning Iowa! Let's #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #Trump2016 
 In the plane heading to Iowa State Fair. Will be great fun. Hopefully giving helicopter rides to some of the kids.
 Making speech tonight in New Hampshire - leaving now. Fantastic people, fantastic crowd!
 . and  should change their fraudulent story to say THAT I DROPPED  & The Apprentice to run for President!
 People don’t understand that I left The Apprentice to run for Pres—the Apprentice DID NOT leave me. Bob Greenblatt & folks  were GREAT!
 Our campaign store is officially open! Visit  to shop the latest #MakeAmericaGreatAgain merchandise.
 Not under my watch- 
 Our online campaign store is officially open! Visit  to shop the latest #MakeAmericaGreatAgain merchandise.
 My official #MakeAmericaGreatAgain hat is now available online. To shop please visit  --- it is selling fast!
 The #IranDeal is a catastrophe that must be stopped. Will lead to at least partial world destruction & make Iran a force like never before.
 Will be interviewed by  tonight for the full hour. Hope you enjoy it and, more importantly, hope you agree!
 Our online store is officially open! Visit  to shop the latest #MakeAmericaGreatAgain merchandise.
 . had a very good debate, far better than Rand Paul.
 . you can do much better than you did tonight on  Better luck tomorrow!
 Why is  allowed to take advantage of the people of Kentucky by running for Senator and Pres. Why should Kentucky be back up plan?
 We must stop the crime and killing machine that is illegal immigration. Rampant problems will only get worse. Take back our country!
 Truly weird Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky reminds me of a spoiled brat without a properly functioning brain. He was terrible at DEBATE!
 Again, illegal immigrant is charged with the fatal  bludgeoning of a wonderful and loved 64 year old woman. Get them out and build a WALL!
 . Thank you so much for the wonderful statements you made about me on TV. Also, keep up the great work!
 . I was pleased to see the wonderful statements you made about me to the media.I'm not surprised, you're a special person
 . You were fantastic on television this weekend. Thank you so much – you are a loyal friend!
 Frank was a great guy married to an absolutely wonderful woman  What a couple! 
 Enough is Enough- no more Bushes! 
 Roger Ailes just called. He is a great guy & assures me that “Trump” will be treated fairly on  His word is always good!
 Oh really, check out innocent  discussion on  show 5 years ago--I am the innocent (pure) one! 
 . Melania  and I send our deepest condolences. Frank was a special and amazing person. He will be missed by all!
 I will be interviewed on  Show at 7:00 A.M. and on Morning Joe at 7:20.
 Wonderful Frank Gifford has just passed away at age 84. He was my friend and a truly great guy! Warmest condolences to family.
 It amazes me that other  networks seem to treat me so much better than  I brought them the biggest ratings in history, & I get zip!
 I just realized that if you listen to Carly Fiorina for more than ten minutes straight, you develop a massive headache. She has zero chance!
 Will be doing Meet the Press, This Week and Face the Nation Sunday morning. Enjoy!
 Small crowds at  today in Atlanta. People were very angry at EWErickson, a major sleaze and buffoon who has saved me time and money
 Almost universal support that "Trump won the debate." Only  is consistantly fighting the Trump win, and I got them the ratings!
 Wow, CNN just said that Donald Trump won the DEBATE, connected best with audience. Also, Time, Drudge, Newsmax, N.Y.Times and more!
 . I miss you all, and thanks for all of your support. Political correctness is killing our country. "weakness."
 Re Megyn Kelly quote: "you could see there was blood coming out of her eyes, blood coming out of her wherever" (NOSE). Just got on w/thought
 So many "politically correct" fools in our country. We have to all get back to work and stop wasting time and energy on nonsense!
 The hatred that clown  has for me is unbelievable – causes him to lie when many others say Trump easily won debate.
 ....Dopey  should be fired. 
 . you should be ashamed of yourself. I got you the highest debate ratings in your history & you say nothing but bad...
 via Bloomberg: Fox News Couldn't Kill Trump's Momentum, Made Him Stronger   
  poll:  winner of last night's debate by wide margin.. 45% v.12%  10%  
 I really enjoyed the debate tonight even though the  trio, especially  was not very good or professional!
 . your so-called "focus groups" are a total joke. Don't come to my office looking for business again. You are a clown!
 Wow,  really bombed tonight. People are going wild on twitter! Funny to watch.
 . I won every poll of the debate tonight by massive margins  &   so where did you find that dumb panel.
 . is a low class slob who came to my office looking for consulting work and I had zero interest. Now he picks anti-Trump panels!
 Wow! What a great honor from  
 Thank you  readers- a great honor! 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain #GOPdebate 
 Wow! What a great honor from  
 Just arrived for the #GOPdebate #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 I look forward to tonight's "debate" -- but look far more forward to making America great again. It can happen!
 . who does a show called "Bob Massi Is The Property Man" on  really knows his stuff--a total pro!
 Wow! Such a wonderful article from fantastic people--my great honor! 
 Poll: Trump Leads GOP Field Among Hispanics, Records 34% Favorability 
 Thank you. 
 Thanks. 
 Do you notice that Hillary spews out Jeb's name as often as possible in order to give him status? She knows Trump is her worst nightmare.
 Many of Hillary’s donors are the same donors as Jeb Bush’s—all rich, will have total control—know them well.
 I will be on  tonight on  at 8 PM and 11 PM.
 Thank you  Call me on my cellphone 917.756.8000 and listen to my campaign message.
 Diligence is the mother of good luck. -- Benjamin Franklin
 Will be interviewed on  at 7:3O. Enjoy!
 Thank you  for your nice comments on  A lot of progress is being made!
 My #GOPDebate  question for the other candidates- 
 We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used when we created them.  --  Albert Einstein
 New Poll Shows Donald Trump Blowing Everyone Else Out of the Water. 
 It came out that Huma Abedin knows all about Hillary’s private illegal emails. Huma’s PR husband, Anthony Weiner, will tell the world.
 . Thanks Judy for the wonderful statements on  Great seeing you there & you did a fabulous job on commentary.
 . Thanks for nice comments over weekend re Turnberry. You and your husband have fantastic taste! Also, great commentary.
 Despite the false  story about Jeb Bush being happy with the Trump surge, he fell more than anybody & is miserable.
 Wow, did the  fall into the Bush trap where his people convinced them how happy he was that I was hurting other candidates & not him
 Bush is pretending that the "Trump surge" is great for him and the  is  reporting Bush "delight" - con job, a Bush nightmare!
 I will be interviewed on  tomorrow morning at 7:00. Enjoy!
 I wish good luck to all of the Republican candidates that traveled to California to beg for money etc. from the Koch Brothers. Puppets?
 Watch my interview with  on  today at 11:30AM ET
 If you think you can do a thing or think you can't do a thing, you're right.  -- Henry Ford
 Wow, some new and even greater polls--thank you!
 Will be leaving Trump Turnberry tomorrow--place & Women's British Open are great. Will be back hitting hard tomorrow. 
 Should not raise taxes in Wisconsin, but massive budget deficit. Education, roads, etc suffering.  lies. 
 Thank you for your service! 
 Thank you. 
 The polls have been consistently great. The silent majority is speaking. Politicians are failing. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 I look forward to the debate on Thursday night & it is certainly my intention to be very nice & highly respectful of the other candidates.
 Just at a news conference from Trump Turnberry in Scotland. Everybody was there & will be all over television tonite. Back on trail Saturday
 Carl Cameron  is the only reporter I know who consistently fumbles & misrepresents poll results. He has been so wrong & he hates it!
 Getting ready to leave for my GREAT resort, Turnberry, in Scotland. Hosting The Women's British Open (biggest tournament). Will be back Sat.
 I really like the Koch Brothers (members of my P.B. Club), but I don't want their money or anything else from them. Cannot influence Trump!
 Thank you. 
 People like lawyer Elizabeth Beck and failed writer Harry Hurt & others talk about me but know nothing about me—crazy!
 How can a dummy dope like Harry Hurt, who wrote a failed book about me but doesn’t know me or anything about me, be on TV discussing Trump?
 Trump Will Make America GREAT!!!!   #ChangeTheWorldIn5Words
 ... while Tom Brady is guilty because he REPLACED his LEGAL cellphone?
 Per  Why does Hillary Clinton get the benefit of the doubt (after she DESTROYS her illegal email server) ...
 Via  by  “Shock poll: Donald Trump leads Jeb Bush 26-20% … in Florida” 
 This is an outrage! Bias-Free Language Guide claims the word 'American' is 'problematic' -- WHAT?! 
 I truly LOVE all of the millions of people who are sticking with me despite so many media lies. There is a great SILENT MAJORITY looming!
 Thank you  for throwing the pathetic reporter from the failing and money losing Daily Beast off the air. Really cool!
 So many people who know nothing about me are commenting all over T.V. and the media as though they have great D.J.T. insight. Know NOTHING!
 .  Why is somebody (Beck) I beat so soundly all of a sudden an expert on Donald Trump (all over television). She knows nothing about me.
 .CNN &   Lawyer Elizabeth Beck did a terrible job against me, she lost (I even got legal fees). I loved beating her,she was easy
 Lawyer Elizabeth Beck was easy for me to beat. Ask her clients if they are happy with her results against me. Got total win and legal fees.
 . &  did not say that lawyer Beck lost the case and I got legal fees. Also, she wanted to breast pump in front of me at dep.
 Public Policy Polling (PPP) has just come out with a major poll putting me #1 with Hispanics - leading all Republican candidates.Told you so
 Via  by  "TRUMP: OBAMA SHOULDN’T ATTACK AMERICANS OVERSEAS, HILLARY’S EMAIL WAS ‘CRIMINAL" 
 A nation WITHOUT BORDERS is not a nation at all. We must have a wall. The rule of law matters. Jeb just doesn’t get it.
 While I’m beating my opponents in the polls, I’m also beating lobbyists, special interests & donors that are supporting them with billions.
 “Government's first duty is to protect the people, not run their lives.” – Ronald Reagan
 We can make Washington work for us. It’s time for real leadership. Let’s #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 Obama’s nuclear deal with the Iranians will lead to a nuclear arms race in the Middle East. It has to be stopped.
 Via  “Trump Doubled Down -- and It Worked” 
 “ ‘PLUNDER AND DECEIT’”  via  by 
 Via cnsnews by  “Trump Explains His Appeal: 'People Are Tired...Of These Incompetent Politicians'” 
 .#IranDeal will go down as one of the dumbest & most dangerous misjudgments ever entered into in history of our country—incompetent leader!
 Via  by “Poll: Trump has twice the support of Bush in New Hampshire” 
 My  int. with  on Obama being all talk & no action & making America Great Again! 
 We must protect our veterans. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Thank you  for your nice words. I am rapidly becoming a  fan! 
 After all is said and done, more is said than done. -- Aesop
 . was fantastic tonight on  Thank you, we will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Thank you  for the great job you did on  Great energy and smarts! I will not let you down.
 Will be interviewed tonight on  at 10:00. There is so much to talk about!
 Boston's Mayor Walsh wasted a lot of time and money on going for the Olympics, and then he gave up. I don't want him negotiating for me!
 I’ll be on  tonight at 10 PM and look forward to it. Lots to discuss!  Enjoy.
 Be in Turnberry on Thurs AM for start of Women's British Open, one of  world's great golf tournaments. Back soon to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 I own Turnberry, in Scotland, one of great resorts in world. Women’s British Open there this week. I’ll go for two days & back on trail.
 . who couldn't get elected dog catcher in NH forgot to mention my phenomenal biz success rate: 99.2% 
 Thanks Lou. 
 Veterans, please call 855- VETS- 352 or email address veterans to share your stories about the need to reform the VA.
 We must build a wall to secure our border. It will save lives and help Make America Great Again! 
 “Iowans Drawn to Donald Trump Praise His Antiestablishment Bent”  via  by  & 
 Via  by  “Strong Showings for Donald Trump in Iowa and New Hampshire Polls” 
 Thanks. 
 . While I think you should have gone to prison for what you did, I guess Obama saved you. But watch – I will win!
 When people find out how bad a job Scott Walker has done in WI, they won’t be voting for him. Massive deficit, bad jobs forecast, a mess.
 Great news, I’m now leading in most polls w/ new CNN poll also having me #1. NBC, I am #1 in NH by a lot, #2 in Iowa, close & gaining.
 Thank you, Greta. 
 Thank you, Wayne Root -- we will #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! 
 . is a nice guy, but not presidential material. Wisconsin is in turmoil, borrowing to the hilt, and doing poorly in jobs etc.
 Always great to speak with Veterans - our nation's heroes. We will Make America Great Again! 
 Great success in Iowa today. Fantastic sold out crowd. Will be back soon!
 Packed venue of people who want to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Supporters waiting to hear me speak in Oskaloosa, Iowa. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 . despite your coming to my office to give me an award, your very dumb fundraiser hit me very hard--- not smart!
 . Congratulations on your engagement --- he is a lucky guy. You are  a true winner and will be an amazing couple.
 . is a big contributor to  . Anybody against Planned Parenthood should boycott racial profiling Macy’s.
 Isn't it funny that I am now #1 in the money losing  (poll), and by a big margin. Dummy  must be thrilled!
 The ultra liberal and seriously failing Des Moines Register is BEGGING my team for press credentials to my event in Iowa today-but they lie!
 Big poll just out by  has me in 1st. place by a lot. A great honor but we have a long way to go to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Getting ready to go to Iowa today. Big crowd - will be a great day!
 Via  by  "DONALD TRUMP SURGES TO COMMANDING LEAD IN POST-MCCAIN BACKLASH POLL" 
 Isn’t it amazing that  paid a massive fine for profiling African Americans--& then criticized me for discussing illegal immigration!
 Thank you   It's time to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain! I hope you are doing well! 
 . has written a great book, Plunder and Deceit. He powerfully analyzes issues that are crucial to us today. Read it!
 True! 
 True, thanks. 
 It is time to send someone from the outside to fix DC from the inside. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Be sure to get a copy of  new book, American Hunter.
 From an amazing day on the border in Laredo. 
 Arriving to check out the border. 
 I love Bluffton, SC, what a great place -- what great people.
 DC has shrunk our military and exploded our country with debt. We can’t send another politician to the White House 
 When will anyone be held accountable for the VA scandal? The politicians are experts in never facing any consequence.
 . watched you on  You were great and I appreciate the nice statements. I’m sending out for your new book now!
 Great read:  “How New York's Veterans Day Parade Became 'America's Parade'” 
 True. 
 Thoughts & prayers with everyone in Lafayette, Louisiana this evening.
 You’re just not getting there  Sometimes things just don’t work out, but don’t worry--- no problem!
 . watched you on  Made some excellent points. Best Wishes.
 Great! 
 Thanks. 
 True! 
 Getting ready to lift off for Laredo. Will land at 1:OO P.M. Should be exciting and informative!
 .   Bill, your small and slightly failing magazine will be a giant success when you finally back Trump. Country will soar!
 What a waste of time being interviewed by  when he puts on really stupid talking heads likeTim O'Brien-dumb guy with no clue!
 Boycott  no guts, no glory. Besides, there are far better stores!
 .  Has the absolutely worst anti-Trump talking heads on his show. Dopey writer O'brian knows nothing about me or my wealth. A waste!
 . you were terrific on  tonight. I am going to the border tomorrow.
 . knows nothing about me or my religion. Came to my office looking for work. I had NO interest. I will save the vets!
 Via  by  "Brody File Exclusive: Donald Trump Comes Out In Support Of 20 Week Abortion Ban" 
 It's going to take an outsider to clean up after Clinton, Bush and Obama. Let's Make America Great Again! 
 Let’s Trump the Establishment! We are no longer silent. We will Make America Great Again! 
 Shouldn’t George Will have to give a disclaimer every time he is on Fox that his wife works for Scott Walker?
 Will be interviewed by  on  tonight. Let’s see if he treats me fairly—enjoy!
 Obama still will keep all military recruitment centers & bases Gun Free Zones! It has to stop. MILITARY LIVES MATTER!
 “Donald Trump on VA woes: ‘I’d fire everybody’; ‘you fix it by getting Trump elected’”  via  by 
 Via  BreitbartNews by  “DONALD TRUMP HEADING TO TEXAS BORDER” 
 Thank you  for your commentary last night on  Very fair -- we are making progress together!
 I'm going to the BORDER tomorrow. Will be seeing some really brave people. Look forward to a big day!
 . in my office last cycle playing nice and begging for my support and money. Hypocrite! 
 True, thanks. 
 I hear a failing New York newspaper is going to publish one of my old cell phone numbers. So original - just one of many!
 Great day today in South Carolina. Fantastic capacity crowd, amazing people!
 Via  “Mother of Murdered Teen Thanks Donald Trump During Senate Hearing” 
 My response to the failing Des Moines Register, the ultra liberal paper that has no power in Iowa 
 I'm glad President Obama followed my lead and lowered the flags half-staff. It's about time!
 Flags to be flown at Half-Staff at all Trump Properties in Honor of the Five Fallen Soldiers- 
 Response to the Des Moines Register- 
 Via  by  &  "Disavowed by GOP leaders, Trump has supporters cheering" 
 .  You're one of the truly great competitiors. I’ve said it for years. Great going winning  - Not surprised!
 . is much smarter than sleepy eyes     Thanks to Steve Bannon & real reporters.
 Rick Perry did an absolutely horrible job of securing the border. He should be ashamed of himself. Gov. Abbott has since been terrific.
 Good luck to my new friends on your testimony in DC. You are amazing people doing something so important--- stopping illegal immigration!
 Just got great national poll numbers - double digit lead!  Thank you, we will all MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Wow, new   preference poll has DonaldTrump 11 points up! Thank you.
 I will be interviewed on  tonight at 8:00. Will be talking about the poor treatment of our veterans, illegal immigration, etc.
 Look how small the pages have become  Looks like a tabloid—saving money I assume!
 This story is no longer about John McCain, it’s about our horribly treated vets. Illegals are treated better than our wonderful veterans.
 It was only after I informed NBC that I wouldn't do the Apprentice that they became upset w/ me. They couldn’t care less about “inclusion"
 We will soon be at a point with our incompetent politicians where we will be treating illegal immigrants better than our veterans.
 The ever dwindling  which is worth about 1/10 of what it was purchased for, is always hitting me politically. Who cares!
 My  piece: "Trump: I don't need to be lectured" 
 I will be making some very big campaign stops next week - big crowds and tremendous  energy!  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN
 The Republican Party must get tougher and smarter, and fast, or it will go down to a very big defeat - just like the last two times!
 A true piece about the standing ovations I got yesterday 
 The Veterans Administration is in shambles and our veterans are suffering greatly. John McCain has done nothing to help them but talk.
 John McCain called thousands of people "crazies" when they came to seek help on illegal immigration last week in Phoenix. He owes apology!
 Wow,   just wrote the definitive piece on what I said about John McCain 
 One of the reasons I am no fan of John McCain is that our Vets are being treated so badly by him and the politicians. I will fix VA quickly.
 Via  “Donald Trump: John McCain Is ‘A Loser’” 
 Why would anybody listen to  He lost an election that should have easily been won against Obama. By the way,so did John McCain!
 Congrats to the new Gov. of Texas,  for taking a tough & bold stance at the border. Should have been done long ago by Perry.
 I have a proven track record supporting our Veterans. Veterans deserve universal access to care. VA scandal proves politicians are inept.
 ....that has served our country is put on a waiting list and gets no care.
 It's a national embarrassment that an illegal immigrant can walk across the border and receive free health care and one of our Veterans.....
 I will make this right for our great Vets!
 All he does is go on television is talk, talk, talk, but incapable of doing anything.
 ....John McCain has failed miserably to fix the situation and to make it possible for Veterans to successfully manage their lives.
 The Veterans of our country have been treated like third class citizens for many years...
 Captured or not, all our soldiers are heroes!
 In addition to doing a lousy job in taking care of our Vets, John McCain let us down by losing to Barack Obama in his run for President!
 Just left Family Leadership Summit in Iowa, got a standing ovation from many wonderful people. I will be back soon.
 Statement on John McCain- 
 I am now in Iowa getting ready to speak. People are always amazed to find out that I am Protestant (Presbyterian). GREAT.
 The $10 billion (net worth) is AFTER all debt and liabilities. So simple to understand but  &  is just plain dumb!
 Ratings starved  and  does not cover me accurately. Why can't they get it right - it's really not that hard!
 Made a speech in Arkansas last night before a record GOP crowd. Great spirit and amazing people. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 It's driving  & the money losing  post crazy that I am #1 in their poll and they only write bad stories about me!
 The liberal clown   told her minions at the money losing  to cover me as enterainment. I am #1 in Huff Post Poll.
 .   Amazing!   Thank you. 
 . really great job handling the wise guys --- so easy for you--- such talent! I won’t forget.
 Response to Huffington Post- 
 Via  
 Via  by  
 Via  
 “God's word is the same, yesterday and today and a million years from now.” - 
 “Donald Trump was proven right on another one of his top issues Thursday: 'gun free zones' at military bases.” 
 Via  March,2013: Jeb said “he was open to…pathway for citizenship for illegal immigrants”  Lying on campaign trail!
 We will no longer be silent. We can take our country back! Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 MILITARY LIVES MATTER! END GUN FREE ZONES! OUR SOLDIERS MUST BE ABLE TO PROTECT THEMSELVES! THIS HAS TO STOP!
 Looking forward to speaking at the  Reagan-Rockefeller Dinner tonight! Record crowd. We are no longer silent! #MAKEAMERICAGREATAGAIN!
 I had thousands join me in New Hampshire last night!  had 68. The #SilentMajority is fed up with what is going on in America!
 Get rid of gun free zones. The four great marines who were just shot never had a chance. They were highly trained but helpless without guns.
 Thoughts and prayers to the families of the four great Marines killed today.
 . failed on the border. He should be forced to take an IQ test before being allowed to enter the GOP debate.
 . just gave a pollster quote on me. He doesn't understand what the word demagoguery means.
 . should be defeated in the primaries. Graduated last in his class at Annapolis--dummy!
 The thousands of people that showed up for me in Phoenix were amazing Americans.  called them "crazies"--must apologize!
 CNN: "New GOP polls show Trump's favorability is up"  
 “No government ever voluntarily reduces itself in size. So governments' programs, once launched, never disappear.” – Ronald Reagan
 More Bush cronyism – “Jeb Bush and the Common Core Money Trail”  It’s the Bush way!
 We need leaders who can negotiate great deals for Americans. It is common sense. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Leaving for New Hampshire now. Making a speech—packed house.  Love it!
 The Iran deal poses a direct national security threat. It must be stopped in Congress. Stand up Republicans!
 The worst show in Las Vegas, in my opinion, is  Hokey garbage. New York show even worse!
 Dopey  O’Donnell, whose unwatchable show is dying in the ratings, said that my Apprentice $ numbers were wrong. He is a fool!
 No deal is better than a bad deal. America out negotiated again.  #Iran
 FLASHBACK – “Donald Trump Blasts Obama for Failing to Secure Christian Pastor’s Freedom in Iran"  via 
 Via  by  “Trump Talks Politics at His Virginia Winery” 
 Via  “Trump is Right: Illegal Alien Crime is Staggering in Scope and Savagery” 
 “30,000 MACY’S CUSTOMERS RETALIATE IN SUPPORT OF DONALD TRUMP”  via  by 
 Is this true about Univision and Fusion? Wow!?! 
 Via  by Steve Bannon: “‘TIME TO GET TOUGH’: TRUMP’S BLOCKBUSTER POLICY MANIFESTO” 
 They are great people! 
 Thank you. 
 . wasted $400 million + and didn’t win one race—a total loser. 
 . You shouldn’t have  on the air—he’s a clown with zero credibility—a Bushy!
 . Great talking to you and your parents—fantastic people. Keep your sister’s very important memory alive—big impact!
 . Thank you, you were great. You can defend me anytime. Amazing job.
 I hope the boycott of  continues forever. So many people are cutting up their cards. Macy's stores suck and they are bad for U.S.A.
 I loved firing goofball atheist Penn  on The Apprentice. He never had a chance. Wrote letter to me begging for forgiveness.
 I hear  show on Broadway is terrible. Not surprised, boring guy (Penn). Without The Apprentice,  show would have died long ago.
 Irrelevant clown  sweats and shakes nervously on  as he talks "bull" about me. Has zero cred. Made fool of himself in '12.
 Thank you Piers. 
 . You were fabulous on CNN last night--I greatly appreciate your support.  Best wishes.
 . should not put  on—he has no credibility, a bush plant who called all races wrong.
 Why do people listen to clown  on  Spent $430M & lost all races—a Bushy!
 . Thank you for yr wonderful tweet of July 4. I wanted a little time to go by before calling. Your sister & family are amazing.
 Via The Hill: Trump Tops National Poll for Second Straight Week 
 We are no longer silent. We are energized & ready to take our country back. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Getting ready to land in Charlottesville, Virginia, at Trump Vineyards, another job producing development that I bought and made AMAZING!
 Who do you want negotiating for us? 
 Response to Hillary Clinton- 
 I can't believe that President Obama isn't able or willing to make just one phone call to the family of Kate Steinle.Come on Pres-MAKE CALL!
 A nation without borders is no nation at all. We must build a wall. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Matt Harvey  -- Don't let the  get you down---nobody reads it. Play well.
 Ford is MOVING jobs from Michigan to Mexico AGAIN!  As President, this will stop on Day One! Jobs will stay here.
 Let Pete Rose into the Baseball Hall of Fame. It's time, he has paid a big and very long price!
 I am so happy that people are boycotting Macy's 
 Very nice -   has me in first place at 18% and Bush second at 14% 
 I absolutely support Kate’s Law—in honor of the beautiful Kate Steinle who was gunned down in SF by an illegal immigrant.
 Rush Limbaugh: "Trump Has Changed the Entire Debate on Immigration" 
 Have some fun with this- 
 El Chapo comes to the U.S. often thru our border—it's been revealed he has CA drivers license. 
 Mexico’s totally corrupt gov’t looks horrible with El Chapo’s escape—totally corrupt. U.S. paid them $3 billion.
 The joke around town is that I freed El Chapo from the Mexican prison because the timing was so good w/ my statements on border security.
 . Greatly appreciate yr wonderful comments this weekend. People of “great accomplishment” should easily quality for prez.
 Isn’t it interesting that now that I’m #1 in the polls, the networks show polls that are a month old!
 When will people, and the media, start to apologize to me for my statement, "Mexico is sending....", which turned out to be true?  El Chapo
 ....likewise, billions of dollars gets brought into Mexico    through the border. We get the killers, drugs & crime, they get the money!
 El Chapo and the Mexican drug cartels use the border unimpeded like it was a  vacuum cleaner, sucking drugs and death right into the U.S.
 The U.S. will invite El Chapo, the Mexican drug lord who just escaped prison, to become a U.S. citizen because our "leaders" can't say no!
 .....but that's what I've been saying. Very unfair treatment by the media!
 Now that the Mexican drug lord escaped from prison, everyone is saying that most of the cocaine etc. coming into the U.S. comes over border!
 I hear that sleepy eyes  will be fired like a dog from ratings starved Meet The Press? I can't imagine what is taking so long!
 ...Trump, however, would kick his ass!
 Can you envision Jeb Bush or Hillary Clinton negotiating with 'El Chapo', the Mexican drug lord who escaped from prison? ....
 Sleep eyes  is killing Meet The Press. Isn't he pathetic? Love watching him fail!
 Mexico's biggest drug lord escapes from jail. Unbelievable corruption and USA is paying the price.  I told you so!
 Phoenix Convention Center officials did not want to have thousands of people standing outside in the heat, so they let them in. A GREAT day!
 Convention Center officials in Phoenix don't want to admit that they broke the fire code by allowing 12-15,000 people in 4,000 code room.
 Via  by  "TRUMP PREACHES PEACE THROUGH STRENGTH IN PHOENIX" 
 I will not be able to attend the Miss USA pageant tomorrow night because I am campaigning in Phoenix. Wishing all well!
 Legal immigrants want border security. It is common sense. We must build a wall! Let's Make America Great Again! 
 Great  segment with  "Breaking Down the Trump Factor"  Let's Make America Great Again!
 Today I am standing with patriots in Arizona for border security! Build a wall! Let's Make America Great Again! 
 Today I will be rallying with with 15,000 patriots in Arizona for border security! Let's Make America Great Again! 
 Via  by  "Father of murder victim to introduce Trump in Phoenix" 
 Getting ready to go to Las Vegas (Freedom Fest) - great crowd. Then on to amazing Phoenix - that will be a total happening! Love America.
 Boycott  and  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Has anyone seen the financials of  They are doing really badly. Too much debt and not enough viewers. Need money fast. Funny!
 The Republicans who want to cut SS & Medicaid are wrong. A robust economy will Make America Great Again! 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump To Brody File in 2011: People Send Me Bibles” 
 A strong military will stop wars. Peace through Strength! Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 “Tone it down? No way! Donald Trump needs to crank up the volume”  via  by 
 I love that thousands of people are boycotting  and cutting up credit cards. No guts no glory. This really backfired - love it!
 Look forward to being in Phoenix tomorrow at 2:00 P.M. Hottest ticket in entire country. Was supposed to be 500 people, now many thousands!
 Standing with Jamiel Shaw, Sabine Durdin, Don Rosenberg, Lupe Moreno, Brenda Sparks, Robin Hvidston & their spouses. 
 Our biggest problems are solved by growth. We need a President who is a job creator. Let’s Make America Great Again!  http://someotherlink.com/
 Laura--Massive crowd, had to move to Phoenix Convention Center. 
 Via  by  “Polls show ‘President Trump’ may not be so far-fetched” 
 I want to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Jeb Bush just announced he raised over $100M. Everyone of those people who contributed are getting something to the detriment of America!
 Iran continues to delay the nuclear deal while doing many bad things behind our backs. Time to WALK and double the sanctions. Stop payments!
 Via  "WHOA: Trump changing venues for Saturday rally in Arizona due to OVERWHELMING RESPONSE" 
 BREAKING - Border security rally in Phoenix, AZ at 2PM MST has been moved to  Build a wall! Let's Make America Great Again!
 I'm on   tonight  &    10PM discussing immigration and lots of other things.#LetsMakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Via  by  “Trump: RNC call was 'congratulatory'” 
 Via  by Katie McHugh:"POLL: DONALD TRUMP LEADS THE PACK AS GOP FRONTRUNNER" 
 Obama and Republicans are hollowing out our military. Now want to cut troop levels. Lowest level in over 20 years.
 The elites want Common Core so they can take education out of parental control. NO! Let's Make America Great Again! 
 True, thanks. 
 Thanks. 
 “TRUMP BATTLES THE NEW TOTALITARIANS: GOP elites join with leftists at Media Matters in targeting threat to both” 
 Via “TRUMP: HILLARY PRESIDENCY WILL CAUSE ‘CRIME WAVE LIKE YOU’VE NEVER SEEN’”  via 
 “ 'Trump Has Changed the Entire Debate on Immigration'”  via  by Jason Devaney
 Why does a failed magazine like  constantly seek out trivial nonsense? Their circulation way down. 
 Dummy   Tiny fragrance deal with Parlux means nothing. Still sold at Trump Tower...
 Dummy  from failing  magazine: NASCAR deal was 1 nite ballroom, ESPN was small golf outing...
 Dummy writer  from failing  magazine works so hard to make such trivial license deals look important…
 Via  “Stop Complaining About Donald Trump” 
 Watched chief negotiator for Iran on  last night. He is far smarter than our reps—increase sanctions and walk!
 Totally false reporting on my call with  Priebus. He called me, ten minutes, said I hit a “nerve", doing well, end!
 You mean George Bush sends our soldiers into combat, they are severely wounded, and then he wants $120,000 to make a boring speech to them?
 Jeb's brother George insisted on a $100,000 fee and $20,000 for a private jet to speak at a charity for severely wounded vets. Not nice!
 Do you believe that highly overrated political pundit   said this is the best Republican field in 35 years. What a dope!
 Via  by  “Pastor To Hispanic Congregation Speaks Out On Trump Immigrant Crime Statement” 
 Via  by Ben Graham: "Border Reports Back Up Trump's 'Rapists' Claim" 
 Thank you  --- As you know I have been saying this for a long time 
 Via  by  “TRUMP UNLOADS: Hillary Clinton was 'the worst' and is 'extremely bad'” 
 Via  by Fredy Riehl: “Donald Trump Talks: Gun Control, Assault Weapons, Gun Free Zones & Self Defense” 
 Dear  I greatly appreciate your fairness. My history shows I never disappoint. Looking forward to meeting you soon.
 .  Thank you for your support this morning on  Even more importantly, play well this week! Say hi to all.
 . Thank you for being so fair this morning on  appreciated.
 Via  by  "Donald Trump and the End of Free Speech" 
 I will be in California this weekend making a speech for Clint Eastwood. Then to Arizona and Vegas. Big crowds. Discussing illegals & more!
 We must restore the entrepreneurial spirit of our country. A small business boom. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Via  “See, Trump Told You So” 
 “RUBIO’S GANG OF 8 BILL WOULD HAVE REWARDED SANCTUARY CITIES HARBORING ILLEGALS”  Marco is a politician-he flip flops!
 MUST READ-"It's time people listened to Trump,' says mother of gunned-down teenage football star"  SECURE THE BORDER!
 Wow! I hear that thousands of people are cutting up their  credit card. That's great. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 . U were great last nite  on FOX. Our country has become a dumping ground for the world--I'll get it to stop & fast!
 People rarely say that many conservatives didn’t vote for Mitt Romney. If I can get them to vote for me, we win in a landslide.
 We have got to take our country back. It's time!
 Thx to all the people who called to say they are cutting their  credit card as a protest against illegal immigrants pouring into US
 I said simply that the Mexican leaders and negotiators are smarter than ours and that the Mexican gov't is pushing their hard core to U.S.
 Thank you  I will be trying very hard to prove you right - great show!
 It is time to create jobs for Americans, not D.C. We need a bold new direction. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Flashback – Jeb Bush says  illegal immigrants breaking our laws is an “act of love”  He will never secure the border.
 Jeb Bush will never secure our border or negotiate great trade deals for American workers. Jeb doesn't see & can't solve the problems.
 I appreciate the GOP candidates who remain strong on border security. They know I am right. A nation without borders cannot survive.
 Rick Perry failed at the border. Now he is critical of me. He needs a new pair of glasses to see the crimes committed by illegal immigrants.
 Miss Universe, Paulina Vega, criticized me for telling the truth about illegal immigration, but then said she would keep the crown-Hypocrite
 Via  "GAME ON: TRUMP RESPONDS TO JEB" 
 Why would Republican candidates want the support of Mitt Romney. He lost an election against Obama that should NEVER have been lost!
 What about the undocumented immigrant with a record who killed the beautiful young women (in front of her father) in San Fran. Get smart!
 HAPPY 4TH OF JULY TO EVERYONE!  MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 I will be on  this morning at 8:30. Enjoy!
 Via  by  "Trump: San Francisco killing shows perils of illegal immigration" 
 . you never speak well of me & yet when I saw you at Fox you ran over like a child and wanted a picture. Please share pic!
 . what do you say to the family of Kathryn Steinle in CA who was viciously killed b/c we can't secure our border? Stand up for US
 Where are the other candidates now that this tragic murder has taken place b/c of our unsafe border  We need a wall!
 My heartfelt condolences to the family of Kathryn Steinle. Very, very sad!
 Our Southern border is unsecure. I am the only one that can fix it, nobody else has the guts to even talk about it. 
 Our Southern border is totally out of control. This is an absolutely disgraceful. situation.  We need border security!
 Via  by  “Matchless Name Recognition and Deep Pockets Make Trump a Threat in Iowa” 
 We need jobs & we need them fast. I am a job creator. None of the pols can or will. Let's Make America Great Again! 
 Via  by  “NYC Mayor Action Against Donald Trump Is ‘Not the American Way’” 
 Wow, Huffington Post just stated that I am number 1 in the polls of Republican candidates. Thank you, but the work has just begun!
 Mexican leaders and negotiators are much tougher and smarter than those of the U.S. Mexico is killing us on jobs and trade. WAKE UP!
 As Governor of Texas, Rick Perry could have done far more to secure the border - but that's O.K., I like him anyway!  
 It is time to bring competence to Washington. It is time get results. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Obama once again just missed a self-imposed deadline with Iran. Our leadership is weak & ineffective. Double the sanctions!
 A country must enforce its borders. Respect for the rule of law is at our country’s core. We must build a wall! 
 New orders for manufacturing down 9/10 months  Time for fair trade. Stop TPP!
 Via  by  “Always Play On Offense” 
 New jobs report: 432,000 left workforce, manufacturing & durable goods go -  We need leaders who understand business.
 “TRUMP DECLARES VICTORY ON IMMIGRATION AS OBAMA ADMITS SOME ILLEGALS ARE ‘GANG BANGERS’”  via  
 Great article by  on  : “Sorry, Donald Trump Has A Point” 
 Via Huffington Post "Congrats, America! Donald Trump Is Now A 2016 Presidential Front-runner"  by Igor Bobic
 Via World Tribune "The elites' problem with Donald Trump: He's not for sale" by Jeffrey T. Kuhner 
 Via  “Mark Levin DEFENDS Trump: Hillary Clinton is a CROOK and a FRAUD and she’s not treated this way!” 
 “NBC FIRES TRUMP, KEEPS SHARPTON: The bigots of the NBC executive suite look the other way”  via  by 
 “Trump Gives 'Em Hell”  via 
 Why doesn’t somebody study the horrible charges brought against  for racial profiling? Terrible hypocrites!
 . stock just dropped. Interesting. So many people calling to say they are cutting up their  credit card. Thank you!
 Make our borders strong and stop illegal immigration. Even President Obama agrees- 
 Look what the President of NBC sent me recently about his stay in my Las Vegas hotel. Very loyal guy. 
 Who is  to pretend innocence when they “racial profile” all over the place? Paid big fine!
 Interesting that  criticized me but just paid $650,000 in fines for racial profiling. Are they racists?
 .  couldn’t be elected dog catcher if he ran again—so he didn’t!
 . was a terrible governor of NY, one of the worst -- would’ve been swamped if he ran again!
 .  Anderson—Thank you for being so fair with your reporting & story last night. Greatly appreciated!
 For all of those who want to #MakeAmericaGreatAgain, boycott  They are weak on border security & stopping illegal immigration.
 Those who believe in tight border security, stopping illegal immigration &  SMART trade deals w/other countries should boycott 
 My recent statement re:  -- We must have strong borders & stop illegal immigration now!… 
 Get ready for  tonight at 8- always interesting!
 Via  "Donald Trump's Controversial Mexican Comments Are Accurate" 
 My just filed lawsuit against Univision. Always fight back when right. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Watch me on the  tonight at 8PM.
  now I know you're smart! See you soon.  #TCOT #MAKEAMERICAGREATAGAIN!
 Thank you Ted. 
 I love the Mexican people, but Mexico is not our friend. They're killing us at the border and they're killing us on jobs and trade. FIGHT!
 We MUST have strong borders and stop illegal immigration. Without that we do not have a country. Also, Mexico is killing U.S. on trade. WIN!
 Statement on Relationship with NBC- 
 Speaking at the City Club of Chicago. Sold out in minutes with thousands on the wait list!… 
 Via  by   "Donald Trump says he is no apprentice when it comes to Israel" 
 Remember, Univision apologized!
 Saudi Arabia should be paying the United States many billions of dollars for our defense of them. Without us, gone!  
 I will be speaking at the City Club of Chicago luncheon today where they turned away thousands of people (Sun Times). Get a larger room!
 . Please send me your new number, your old one’s not working. Sincerely, Donald J. Trump
 Univision apologized to me but I will not accept their apology. I will be suing them for a lot of money. Miss U.S.A. contestants are hurt!
 . the dying tabloid owned by dopey clown Mort Zuckerman, puts me on the cover daily because I sell. My honor, but it is dead!
 See story in Fusion and Huff. Post about rape at the border. Beyond terrible! Isn't Fusion owned by Univision?
 Via  by  “Trump: ‘We look like we’re beggars’ in Iran nuclear talks” 
 Will be in Chicago tomorrow for a record setting (by far) luncheon.
 Addressing record crowd  Madison County Iowa GOP Dinner. We can bring common sense to DC & Make America Great Again! 
 Must read article via  "DONALD TRUMP VERSUS MEXICO" 
 An interesting and very sad article on rape at the border. Thank you  
 A great article by  spelling out the truth on Mexico, trade, the border & illegals. Thank you  
 I'll be in Iowa tonight making a speech to a record setting crowd. The word is getting out, MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 The leader and negotiators representing Mexico are far smarter and more cunning than the leader and negotiators representing the U.S.!
 Only very stupid people think that the United States is making good trade deals with Mexico.Mexico is killing us at the border and at trade!
 . Bill, you are really beginning to understand what is going on with "Trump" - actually, you always knew!
 When you are in a war, or even a battle, losing is not an option!
 When somebody challenges you unfairly, fight back - be brutal, be tough - don't take it. It is always important to WIN!
 Letter to  - Re:  
 If I win the presidency, my judicial appointments will do the right thing unlike Bush's appointee John Roberts on ObamaCare.
 . cares far more about Mexico than it does about the U.S.  Are they controlled by the Mexican government?
 Anyone who wants strong borders and good trade deals for the US should boycott 
 Once again the Bush appointed  Supreme Court Justice John Roberts has let us down. Jeb pushed him hard! Remember!
 I love Mexico but not the unfair trade deals that the US so stupidly makes with them. Really bad for US jobs, only good for Mexico.
 Univision wants to back out of signed  contract because I exposed the terrible trade deals that the U.S. makes with Mexico.
 Mexican gov doesn't want me talking about terrible border situation & horrible trade deals. Forcing Univision to get me to stop- no way!
 Governor Rick Scott of Florida did really poorly on television this morning. I hope he is O.K.
 I hear that dopey political pundit, Lawrence O'Donnell, one of the dumber people on television, is about to lose his show-no ratings?Too bad
 We have to bring back and cherish the middle class - once the backbone and true strength of the U.S.A. It can happen!
 My message, MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, is beginning to take hold. Bring back our jobs, strengthen our military and borders, help our VETS!
 My daughter Ivanka did great tonight in New Hampshire. The sold out crowd loved her, and she loved them. Thanks Ivanka!
 . had better surround herself with better hosts than Nicole Wallace, who doesn't have a clue. The show is close to death!
 The ratings for The View are really low. Nicole Wallace and Molly Sims are a disaster. Get new cast or just put it to  sleep. Dead T.V.
 I am really beginning to respect Mark Halperin and John Heilemann as political reporters - they truly get why "Trump" poll numbers are high.
 Just out, the new nationwide  poll has me alone in 2nd place, closely behind Jeb Bush-but Bush will NEVER Make America Great Again!
 Uncomfortable looking NBC reporter Willie Geist calls me to ask for favors and then mockingly smiles when he is told of my high poll numbers
 . song, “Rockin’ In The Free World” was just one of 10 songs used as background music. Didn’t love it anyway.
 For the nonbeliever, here is a photo of  in my office and his $$ request—total hypocrite. 
 . A few months ago Neil Young came to my office looking for $$ on an audio deal & called me last week to go to his concert. Wow!
 My daughter, Ivanka, will be representing me today at the opening of our campaign office in Manchester, NH  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain!
 Thank you. 
 Politician  didn't like that I said Baltimore needs jobs & spirit. It's politicians like Cardin that have destroyed Baltimore.
 The highly respected Suffolk University poll just announced that I am alone in 2nd place in New Hampshire, with Jeb Bust (Bush) in first.
 Speaking at the Red, White and Blue Dinner in Maryland- 
 Via  Trump Surges In New Hampshire Poll: MOGUL, REALITY STAR EMERGES AS GRANITE STATE’S ‘ANTI-BUSH’ 
 My  interview on  “Trump: 'Last Person I'd Want Negotiating for Me Is Obama'” 
 Via  by  “Trump Surges in Popularity in N.H.” 
 “Donald trump files statement of candidacy”  via 
 Via  by  ”Defying Doubters, Donald Trump Makes Presidential Bid Official” 
 Today I filed my Statement of Candidacy with the FEC. Let's #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 True. 
 .  Have you released a copy of the beautiful thank you card you sent me? Would you like to see it?  
 Entrepreneurs: Brainpower is the ultimate leverage. Don't underestimate yourself or your possibilities.
 Entrepreneurs: Be tough, be smart, be personable, but don't take things personally. That's good business.
 Entrepreneurs: Negotiation is an art. Treat it like one.
 The Senate must NOT pass TPA! Any Senator who votes for it is disqualified for being POTUS. Protect the American worker and manufacturer!
 Flashback – Jeb Bush received a $4M tax payer bailout in 1990   Guess who was POTUS then?
 Who do you want negotiating for us? #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 It's time for government to stop picking winners & losers. Let’s make sure everyone can achieve the American dream! 
 .  Great job--you are a true champion! See you soon.
 Thank you. 
 .  Thank you for your nice words--greatly appreciated.
 I want to thank Elizabeth, Steve, Brian and all of the great folks of  for the long and successful run we had together. NICE!
 Sadly, I will no longer be doing  at 7:00 A.M. on Mondays. This is because I am running for president and law prohibits. LOVE!
 . still thinks Romney won! He doesn't have a clue! 
 . stated clearly that he wants to repeal the 2nd Amendment. I thought  was going to fire that jerk after his Romney fiasco?
 The great Mike Wallace covered me in a much more professional manner than his son, Chris Wallace of  Mike was a total pro!
 . was so unprofessional and biased when discussing me on This Week.  should not allow this conduct!
 . who spent $430 million in the last cycle and didn't win one race, said I'm not a candidate until I file papers. Next week Karl!
 Via  by  "Exclusive: Trump Slams Obamatrade, Stands Up For American Jobs" 
 Happy Father's Day to all! I had a wonderful and loving father. 
 Via  by  "Donald Trump’s resume backs his run for president" 
 Who would you rather have negotiating for the U.S. against Putin, Iran, China, etc., Donald Trump or Hillary? Is there even a little doubt?
 Thank you  for your nice words. The U.S. is becoming a dumping ground for the world. Pols don't get it. Make America Great Again!
 My speech is right now on C-SPAN 1
 Druggies, drug dealers, rapists and killers are coming across the southern border. When will the U.S. get smart and stop this travesty?
 Mexico is killing the United States economically because their leaders and negotiators are FAR smarter than ours. But nobody beats Trump!
 I like Mexico and love the spirit of  Mexican people, but we must protect our borders from people, from all over, pouring into the U.S.
 Why did  beg me for a tweet (endorsement) when her book was launched?
 Our country is in a major crisis of incompetent leadership. We cannot continue to go on with these politicians who do nothing but talk.
 . thx 4 your great article. Our country is in big trouble w/the dopey politicians that are running it 
 Via  by  "Donald Trump declares war on lying, street-hustlers of Congress” 
 Out of hundreds of deals & transactions, I have used the bankruptcy laws a few times to make deals better. Nothing personal, just business.
 Almost every major dealmaker has used the bankruptcy laws as a business tool. Icahn, Black, Zell—but nobody says they went bankrupt!
 People buy deals & immediately put them into bankruptcy in order to make better deals. It’s a very effective & commonly used business tool.
 Stop saying I went bankrupt. I never went bankrupt but like many great business people have used the laws to corporate advantage—smart!
 Hillary Clinton reaches new low. #TrumpVlog 
 Has Charles  ever apologized for being so totally wrong on Iraq? I called it right in every way—Make America Great Again!
 George Will was a big Iraq fool.  $2 trillion, thousands of lives lost -- & we got nothing! Dummy.
 Goofy political pundit George Will spoke at Mar-a-Lago years ago. I didn’t attend because he’s boring & often wrong—a total dope!
 Just watched Brian Williams on  - very sad! Brian should get on with a new life and not start all over at  Stop apologizing
 Trump Nat'l Golf Club Philadelphia, 360 beautiful acres as designed by Tom Fazio with views of the Philly skyline. 
 Watch my appearance on  - great interview! 
 The tragedy in South Carolina is incomprehensible. My deepest condolences to all.
 Trump Int'l Hotel & Tower, Chicago, has received accolades for design, service & our signature restaurant, "Sixteen" 
 Thank you. 
 Speaking to great patriots  My first visit to Granite State since declaring my candidacy! #FITN 
 Heading to New Hampshire. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 We need someone with experience to rebuild America. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Only a fool would buy the  Loses fortune & has zero gravitas. Let it die!
 Thank you Sarah--Let's have pizza in New York soon with you & your great family 
 Enjoyed watching  analysis of my  interview. Great points! Thank you, Monica.
  in addition,no doubt you would have been amazing on  Keep up the great work.
 Thanks  Really nice! I’m glad I did your show. 
  watched you on my flight to Iowa. Will not be forgotten.
 Dear  Thank you so much for your nice words today on  Will not be forgotten! In Iowa now. Packed house!
 Today I officially declared my candidacy for President of the United States. Watch the video of my full speech- 
 Thanks Eric. 
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 I am officially running for President of the United States. #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 LIVE on #Periscope: Major announcement! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Thanks Geraldo, you're a champion. 
 11AM #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Make sure to follow me on  I will be streaming my announcement at 11AM.
 In one hour I will be making a major announcement from Trump Tower. Watch it live on Periscope! 
 Make sure to follow me on  #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 It is almost time. I will be making a major announcement from  at 11AM. Follow on social media! #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Thanks. 
 Big time in U.S. today - MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! Politicians are all talk and no action - they can never bring us back.
 Do we really need another Bush in the White House--- we have had enough of them. 
 Great! 
 Thanks. 
 Will do, thanks. 
 Great! 
 Thanks. 
 LIVE on #Periscope 
 Tomorrow at 11AM #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Tomorrow will be a really big day for America. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Tuesday will be a big day for our country to do a complete turnaround. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Remember, politicians are all talk and no action - they will never be able to MAKE OUR COUNTRY GREAT AGAIN! Controlled by lobbyists & donors
 I am really happy that Hillary made her speech right under Trump World Tower!
 Thank you. 
 Thank you. 
 Should not pass--bad deal! 
 Thanks. 
 Thank you. 
 True! 
 Entrepreneurs: Do not go where the path may lead, go instead where there is no path and leave a trail. -- Ralph Waldo Emerson
 Entrepreneurs: Focus on your goals, not on fixed patterns. Do what's necessary and what's unnecessary will be made clear.
 Entrepreneurs: Don’t sell yourself short. Don’t ever think you’ve done it all already or that you’ve done your best.
 Entrepreneurs: Keep your eyes on your ideals as well as reality. Accentuate the positive without being blind to the negative.
 Looking for Father's Day gift?  named the spa  one of the best places for men to relax 
 Thank you. 
 Thanks. 
 Thank you. 
 Thank you. 
 There is. 
 Thanks & I won't let you down. 
 Thanks. 
 Great, thanks. 
 Thank you. 
 Video: Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point  
 Congratulations to  for winning the 2015 Traveler's Choice Award from  
 Thank you  for featuring  in your list of "Best Private Dining Rooms in Chicago." 
 Entrepreneurs:  Review your work habits regularly and make sure they are taking you in the right direction. Keep your focus intact.
 Entrepreneurs: Take responsibility for yourself. It’s a very empowering attitude.
 Entrepreneurs: Follow your own path—it will bring you to the places you were meant to be.
 Our  is really starting the summer on the right foot with their #wellness program as seen in  
 Thank you  for featuring  in your list of "Best Private Dining Rooms in Chicago." 
 Thank you. 
 Via Hardball with Chris Matthews 
 Via  “ gets new clubhouse” 
 Via the New York Times 
 Via  by “Poll: Trump Surges Among GOP Hopefuls in NH” 
 Trump Int'l Hotel & Tower New York, includes Central Park views & our signature restaurant, Jean Georges. Perfection! 
 Trump Turnberry is a spectacular place--and home to four of the greatest Open Championships of all time. 
 Via  “New Hampshire Poll: Trump into top-tier status” 
 Amazing NH poll released! We are getting ready to Make America Great Again! 
 Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles offers 18 holes fronting the Pacific Ocean on the Palos Verdes Peninsula. 
 Loved doing #NCGOPConvention keynote speech last night! Unbelievable reception. Had the biggest crowds by far of any of the GOP candidates.
 Will be doing  live tomorrow at 7AM ET from Europe.
 Going to Scotland, Ireland & other places in Europe to close up deals. Getting ready for the June 16th announcement 
 Via  by  "In Raleigh, Donald Trump all but announces presidential bid" 
 Just received a standing ovation at #NCGOPCon when I said, "We need to bring the American Dream back better and stronger than ever before!"
 Just said at #NCGOPCon that "I'm not beholden to lobbyists and donors! No special interest would control me if I were in office."
 Just made the point at #NCGOPcon that "we have to protect our border & I think everyone here knows, nobody can build a wall like Trump!"
 Just received applause at #NCGOPcon when I said  "People ask me why I may run for President-- I might so we can Make America Great Again!
 Just said at #NCGOPcon that "politicians are all talk and no action and we are all tired of it! We need action and results to move forward!"
 Received a standing applause at #NCGOPcon when I said "to have free trade be fair for the US we need really intelligent negotiators."
 Just Introduced at #NCGOPcon as the country's highest paid speaker. Told the record crowd of 650 I am to be speaking here for free!
 Going to North Carolina to make keynote speech - sold out crowd!
 “Our runaway judiciary is badly in need of restraint by Congress.” - Phyllis Schlafly
 Our nation has a duty to care for our vets & their families. It's time to do it! Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 We must stop Common Core from controlling state & local curriculums. It is a federal grab of education. Keep education local!
 China just hacked our federal government & stole gov. workers’ information. Why do our leaders let China get away with this?! No respect.
 Via  by  “Trump: We'll bring American dream back” 
 “Donald Trump: I’ve made up my mind on 2016”   via  by 
 . memoir is a powerful example of perseverance & hope. “Getting Real” is as real as it gets. Get it & enjoy! #GettingReal
 Looking forward to keynoting the  #NCGOPcon dinner tomorrow night!   is a top state party!
 Via  by  “Donald Trump speaks to veterans, residents in Coralville” 
 Trump International Golf Club Turnberry, Scotland -- home to four of the greatest Open Championships of all time.. 
 Was in Iowa yesterday-great people. Record crowds at both speeches. Something big is happening. Pols are all talk. Make America great again!
 Dummy political pundit  constantly pressed the crazy war in Iraq. Many lives and trillions of dollars wasted. U.S. got NOTHING!
 . pretends to be a smart guy, but if you look at his record, he isn't. A dummy who is on too many Fox shows. An overrated clown!
 One of the worst and most boring political pundits on television is  A totally overrated clown who speaks without knowing facts
 With great patriots in Mason City who also want to bring the American Dream back! We can Make America Great Again! 
 Standing ovation after promising to bring the American Dream back, and better than ever before! 
 Standing room only in Mason City, Iowa! Thanks to the record crowd of over 400 supporters! 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump stops in Coralville” 
 Trump Nat'l Golf Club, Philadelphia, is a 360 acre beauty and an award winning Tom Fazio designed course--fantastic! 
 Entrepreneurs: Vision remains vision until you focus, do the work, and bring it down to earth where it will do some good.
 Re Negotiation: Think about what the other side wants. Know where they're coming from. View any conflict as an opportunity. Be flexible.
 Entrepreneurs: Negotiation is an art. Treat it like one.
 “Fortunately for a quarterback, you can play for a long time because you don't get hit very often.” – Tom Brady  
 Just as I predicted, while Obama lifted sanctions 18 months ago, Iran cheated & increased its nuclear fuel by 20%. We must DOUBLE sanctions!
 Excited to be returning to the  State Convention as the Keynote of Saturday’s dinner!  is a strong Conservative state party!
 Bureaucratic red tape and overregulation are discouraging the American dream. It’s time for a bold new direction! 
 Via  “Trump to jet in to unveil Trump  clubhouse” 
 Looking forward to visiting Mason City, Iowa, tomorrow. Will be my 8th day in the Hawkeye State this year! 
 “I love it when people doubt me. It makes me work harder to prove them wrong.” – Derek Jeter
 The Trans-Pacific Partnership will increase our trade deficits & send even more jobs overseas. This is a bad deal. Time for smart trade!
 Too bad I don't get this for political speeches- they cost me a fortune! 
 The Spa  offers unique treatments that use traditional Hawaiian botanicals & healing techniques 
 Entrepreneurs: Set the bar high and resolve to be bigger than your problems. Who's the boss?
 Entrepreneurs: There's nothing wrong with bringing your talents to the surface. Having an ego and acknowledging it is a healthy choice.
 Entrepreneurs: Achievers move forward at all times. Achievement is not a plateau, it's a beginning. Get out there & go for it!
 “The Constitution is the guide which I never will abandon” - George Washington
 . is proud to be hosting  where all 4 Major Champions will square off. October 2015. 
 Via  by Melody Dareing: “Donald Trump Wants to Build a Wall Between U.S. And Mexico” 
 Via  “Donald Trump vows to be the 'greatest representative of Christians' if he wins White House” 
 All the haters & losers must admit that, unlike others, I never attacked dopey Jon Stewart for his phony last name. Would never do that!
 While Jon Stewart is a joke, not very bright and totally overrated, some losers and haters will miss him & his dumb clown humor. Too bad!
 June 16th- 
 Awarded 5 Stars by    offers    Executive Chef  new menu 
 For those of you that have conveniently forgotten, dummy Jon Stewart is a bad filmmaker. His last effort was a real bomb (in all ways)!
 Jon Stewart is the most overrated joke on television. A wiseguy with no talent. Not smart, but convinces dopes he is! Fading out fast.
 I will be on  at 7:00 A.M.  ENJOY!
 For those of you that have conveniently fotgotten, dummy Jon Stewart is a bad filmmaker. His last effort was a real bomb (in all ways)!
 I would like to offer Vice President Biden my warmest condolences on the loss of his wonderful son, Beau. Met him once, great guy!
 All the haters and losers must admit that, unlike others,  I never attacked dopey Jon Stewart for his phony last name. Would never do that!
 While Jon Stewart is a joke, not very bright and totally overrated, some losers and haters will miss him and his dumb clown humor. Too bad!
 Jon Stewart is the most overrated joke on television. A wiseguy with no talent. Not smart, but convinces dopes he is! Fading out fast.
 Wow, the economy is really bad! GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT down 0.7% in 1st. quarter - and getting worse. I TOLD YOU SO! Only I can fix.
 “Confidence is contagious. So is lack of confidence.” - Vince Lombardi
 ICYMI, Via  by Post Editorial Board: “ New Gem in the Bronx” 
 Via  “ New York Debuts Sizzling Summer Offerings” 
 “Donald Trump To Be In Mason City June 4th”  via 
 “ was something we’ve been working on for years and Donald Trump got it to the finish line.” - 
 Trump Int'l Golf Links & Hotel, Ireland, is on 400 beautiful acres & fronts the Atlantic Ocean for 2.5 miles. Spectac! 
 Entrepreneurs: Ask yourself: What can I provide that does not yet exist? Be open to new ideas. Be innovative!
 Entrepreneurs: Set the example. You can motivate others as well as yourself by remembering that you are setting the example.
 Entrepreneurs: Get--and keep--your momentum going. Without momentum, a lot of great ideas go nowhere.
 Required reading 4 success in politics & life read  book #MakingTheCase. Brilliant Advice ! 
 I had a fantastic time with  at the grand opening of the great  Watch the video- 
 “Face reality as it is, not as it was or as you wish it to be.” - 
 It’s time for politicians to be reminded they work for us! We can get it done. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 ObamaCare premiums could jump as high as 51%  Terrible for economy. Repeal & Replace with free market solution!
 Common Core is a federal takeover of school curriculum. Department of Education should be disbanded not expanded. Focus on local education.
 Via  by Malcolm Unwell: “Taking Trump Seriously” 
 “Get some face time in The Spa at    via  by Renée Libutti
 My  int. on  on how to defeat ISIS, Obama losing ground to ISIS, & Making America Great Again! 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump: 'We Must Make America Great Again'” 
 In the end, you're measured not by how much you undertake, but by what you finally accomplish!
 Politicians are all talk and no action. Bush and Rubio couldn't answer simple question on Iraq. They will NEVER make America great again!
 Good advice from my mother:  "Trust in God and be true to yourself." -- Mary Trump
 Good advice from my father: "Know everything you can about what you're doing." --  Fred C. Trump
 “ elated at official grand opening of   via  by 
 In business, you make decisions that are in your best interests. Time for the US gov't to do the same. Let’s Make America Great Again!
 Resolve never to quit, never to give up, no matter what the situation.  -- Jack Nicklaus
 On 800 pristine Miami acres,  boasts luxurious accommodations, world-class dining & championship golf 
 A quote from the late, great golfer, Sam Snead: "Practice puts brains in your muscles!" THIS IS TRUE ALSO IN LIFE.
 Will be doing  interview  tomorrow. So much to talk about!
 . new book-- "Adios, America! The Left's Plan to Turn Our Country into a Third World Hellhole"-- is a great read. Good job!
 “Everyone's dream can come true if you just stick to it and work hard.” - 
 Entrepreneurs: Realize that persistence can go a long way. Being stubborn is often an attribute.
 Entrepreneurs: Problems are a mind exercise. Enjoy the challenge.
 Entrepreneurs: See yourself as victorious--look at the solution, not the problem.
 If any candidate believes that with what we know today we still should have invaded Iraq then they are unqualified to be Commander-in-Chief.
 Whether you think you can or think you can't---you are right. -- Henry Ford
 My honor. 
 I will be going to Trump Links at Ferry Point for the official opening of this long delayed  (but future NYC treasure) course. Great job "D"
 The middle-class has become the new poor in this country and our incompetent politicians are unable to do anything about it.They don't care!
 I will be interviewed on  at 7:00 A.M.
 I would like to wish everyone, including all haters and losers (of which, sadly, there are many) a truly happy and enjoyable Memorial Day!
 Nobody understands politicians like I do - all talk and no action. They will never get our country where it needs to be, truly great again!
 Think BIG! You are going to be thinking anyway, so you might as well  think BIG!
 I told  that  and I had identical views on a certain issue and she cut it out of the taped interview. Why? Too bad!
 A strong America creates opportunity and growth. We just need to change Washington. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 On this Memorial Day holiday, we honor our fallen soldiers who have made the greatest sacrifice for freedom. They are our country’s finest.
 “Patriotism is supporting your country all the time, and your government when it deserves it.” – Mark Twain
 Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point: Grand Opening next Tuesday May 26th at 11 AM. Jack Nicklaus will be joining me. 
 Audience chanting "RUN TRUMP RUN!" during my my  speech! They are going to be very happy...
 Via  by  &  "Mr. Trump Goes to Washington And Talks 2016" 
 Just received huge applause when I said Berghdal should be sent back to Afghanistan!  speech is sold out with record crowd.
 Looking forward to receiving 2015 Statesman of the Year award tonight by  A record 2,000+ sell out 
 Entrepreneurs: In the best negotiations, everyone wins. This is a possibility and it's the ideal situation to strive for.
 Entrepreneurs: Believe in yourself. If you don't, no one else will either.
 Entrepreneurs: Be totally focused. Being successful requires nothing less than 100% of your concentrated effort.
 Just 30 minutes from Manhattan,  is Westchester’s most elite club offering a 7,291 yard course 
 Via  by  “Is the White House Big Enough for Donald Trump?” 
 Flashback: “NYers were grateful when Donald Trump finished ahead of schedule and under budget the Wollman Rink” 
 Via  by Robert Silk: “Renovations make Trump's Doral a showcase once again” 
 Why Donald Trump Won’t Touch Your Entitlements: DES MOINES, Iowa—Donald Trump says if he runs for p... 
 .  New book is excellent and so true! Congrats!
 Signing The Facebook Wall- 
 I had a great time today visiting Facebook NY. 
 .  Will be on Fox now. Watch and enjoy!
 I will be interviewed on  The Kelly File tonight. Be sure to watch on  
 Our country has tremendous potential. Together, we can fix Washington. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Yesterday the White House claimed its ISIS strategy is a 'success.' Tell that to the Christians being beheaded. We need to hit ISIS hard!
 My  int. discussing the persecution of Christians in the Middle East & Religious Liberty & Freedom 
 My  int. from Iowa on how I would build a wall to secure our Southern Border & deduct costs from Mexico 
 Looking forward to being awarded the ‘2015 Statesman of the Year’ by  this Thursday. A record 2,000+ attendees-Can't wait!
 Via  “Donald Trump Sends Message to  
 Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point is a Jack Nicklaus Signature Design 18 hole course, just minutes from Manhattan 
 I had a great time answering as many questions as possible in sixty seconds at  NY today- 
 What people don’t know about Kasich- he was a managing partner of the horrendous Lehman Brothers when it totally destroyed the economy!
 I now see John Kasich from Ohio- who is desperate to run- is using my line “Make America Great Again”. Typical pol- no imagination!
 There is no way my friend Bob Kraft agreed not to appeal the NFL decision without making a deal to at least get something. We love Tom Brady
 WOW, SO NICE AND SO TRUE. THANK YOU! "  #TRUMP2016 TIME TO RETHINK THE CHOICES 
 A MUST WATCH - TRULY BEAUTIFUL! " Amazing Turnberry Ailsa course changes from  #Golf 
 With Sen. Elizabeth Dole &  Caregiver Fellows. Tremendous people caring for our military & veterans! 
 Incredible progress at  – Punta del  Este, Uruguay -- the views are going to be fantastic! 
 “Actions are the seed of fate    deeds grow into destiny.”   – Harry S. Truman
 Entrepreneurs: Remember the golden rule of negotiating -- he who has the gold makes the rules.
 Entrepreneurs: Work on what you will be proud to be associated with. Make your work count.
 Entrepreneurs:  Be tough, be smart, be personable --  but don't take things personally. That's good business.
 TPP does not stop Japan’s currency manipulation & China has a backdoor to join. It must be stopped. We need to protect the American worker!
 Our debt finances China’s military. It's time to get tough – we hold all the cards. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump Will End Outsourcing If President” 
 FLASHBACK via  from 2004: “Donald Trump Would 'Fire' Bush Over Iraq Invasion” It's called great vision. 
 “Trump: I created tens of thousands of jobs”  via  by 
 Remember when Jeb gave Hillary a medal on the 1 year anniversary of Benghazi?!  Guess he would have invaded Libya too!
 Host of the  &   is home to 4 unique courses including the famous Blue Monster 
 Congrats to  on his new  show! Greg makes great TV and is a terrific guy.
 . a great place!  
 Via David Ebner re Stanley Cup & Trump poster: “If you’re going to be thinking anything, you might as well think big” 
 Gallup finds Des Moines, Iowa, has the highest community pride (76.5) of any large city. Congrats and I agree--I love the place! 
 Marco Rubio had no idea what he was doing on Chris Wallace show. Said Iraq "was not a mistake." He looked clueless!
 I will be on  at 7:00 A.M. So much to talk about but not much good news for the U.S.A. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Wow, ISIS has just taken the City of Ramadi in Iraq. So many of our great soldiers died in originally going after it.  Such a waste.
 I laugh when I see Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush pretending to "love" each other, with each talking of their great friendship. Typical phony pols
 Marco Rubio was a complete disaster today in an interview with Chris Wallace  concerning our invading Iraq.He was as clueless as Jeb
 Jeb Bush gave five different answers in four days on whether or not we should have invaded Iraq.He is so confused.Not presidential material!
 Via  by  Bring back jobs from overseas”  Let's Make America Great Again!
 Today is armed forces day. Thank you  to our military service members! I love you all!
 Received a standing ovation in packed house  after Sam Clovis intro! Let's Make America Great Again! 
 I am in Iowa today, great STATE, fantastic PEOPLE! Many speeches, big crowds - all sold out! MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Excited to be speaking at   Iowa National Security Action Summit tomorrow at 1:30PM! 
 Via  "14 Reasons Donald Trump Is Really Running — and Doing Well" 
 Looking forward to being interviewed by Sam Clovis tomorrow at  in Sioux City at 10AM CT! Let’s Make America Great Again!
 Via  by  "Donald Trump’s Refreshing Lack Of A Filter" 
 Via  by  “Trump inches closer to a decision” 
 Excited to keynote of the sold-out Pottawattamie County Republican Party Lincoln/Reagan Dinner tonight!  Leaving now!
 .  Bill, fantastic job this morning on  - you are a total winner and I am proud of you as first Apprentice CHAMP!
 I cannot believe how bad Jeb Bush looks with his insane answer on Iraq, and then his numerous corrections which made him look even worse.
 Via  by  ChrisCassidy_BH: "Donald Trump says Jeb Bush is wrong about Iraq" 
 Trump Int'l Hotel & Golf Links Ireland (formerly The Lodge at Doonbeg) is a 5 star resort fronting the Atlantic Ocean 
 “Failure isn’t fatal, but failure to change might be” – John Wooden
 Going to New Hampshire, all sold out crowds. People want real change - POLS WILL NEVER MAKE OUR COUNTRY GREAT AGAIN!
 I call Jeb Bush the reluctant warrior --- he just doesn't want to be doing this, he is not having fun!
 Who ever heard of a legal conviction statement “more probable than not” against Tom Brady? Sue them, Tom, and make lots of $. 
 I hope Tom Brady sues the hell out of the  for incompetence & defamation. They will drop the case against him--and he will win.
 You can be an  player with murder charges and not be suspended. Yet with NO EVIDENCE,  targeted Tom Brady. B.S.!
 Needed: Leaders who negotiate smart trade deals.Only one knows The Art of The Deal. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Huge Townhall tomorrow at 5PM in the NH Barrington Middle School! Thanks to  for hosting! Let’s Make America Great Again!
 Looking forward to touring the  world headquarters tomorrow! One of the top gun manufacturers in the US! #GunRights #TCOT
 Thanks  for hosting me tomorrow at the Two International Group! Looking forward to making new friends & discussing #FITN topics.
 Via  by  “The Trump Card: Make America Great Again” 
 My major hotel conversion of The Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue in D.C. is under budget and ahead of schedule. Should be U.S.A.
 We are rebuilding other countries while our own country is going to HELL. Time to rebuild the U.S.A.! Tell our stupid politicians, ENOUGH
 I am the BEST builder, just look at what I've built. Hillary can't build. Republican candidates can't build. They don't have a clue!
 TRAIN WRECK just the beginning. Our roads, airports, tunnels, bridges, electric grid - all falling apart.I can fix for 20% of pols, & better
 Remember, politicians are all talk and NO action. Our country is a laughing stock that is going to hell. The lobbyists & donors control all!
 The only one to fix the infrastructure of our country is me - roads, airports, bridges. I know how to build, pols only know how to talk!
 Amtrak crash near Philadelphia, train derails -many hurt, some badly. Our country has horrible infrastructure problems. Pols can't solve!
 Jeb Bush really blew his interview with  - should cost him big time. Said he would do the disastrous  Iraq war all over again
 My  interview on Tom Brady, Hillary Clinton, the Granite State & Making America Great Again! 
 “Polling strong, Donald Trump starting to get serious”  via  by 
 Glad the Trans-Pacific Partnership failed in the Senate. Bad deal for American worker & economy! We need SMART TRADE! 
 Via  “Streetsense Brings "The National," a Geoffrey Zakarian Restaurant, to DC's New Trump Intl Hotel” 
 Via  “DONALD TRUMP: ‘RICH PEOPLE DON’T LIKE ME’–POOR, MIDDLE-INCOME PEOPLE ‘LIKE ME BEST’” 
 Entrepreneurs: Look at the solution, not the problem. Learn to focus on what will give results.
 Entrepreneurs: Keep the big picture in mind. There are always opportunites and possibilities & thinking too small can negate a lot of them.
 Entrepreneurs: Be passionate. You have to love what you're doing to be successful at it.
 I was proud to be one of Ronald Reagan's earliest supporters. Like Reagan, it's time to Make America Great Again! 
 Sue them Tom! #TrumpVlog 
 What a STUPID deal for Verizon to buy AOL for $4.4 billion. AOL has been bad luck for everyone who touched it. Worth less than $1 billion!
 One of the dumber and least respected of the political pundits is Chris Cillizza of the Washington Post  Moron hates my poll numbers
 Why do we always try to destroy our true champions and winners in this country, while at the same time leaving the losers alone? STUPID!
 People are so jealous of Tom Brady and the Patriots. No court could convict based on the evidence.They can't beat him on the field, so this!
 Can you imagine, we spend billions of dollars protecting Saudi Arabia and now the King refuses to even meet with Obama. Great leadership!
 They had no definitive proof against Tom Brady or #patriots. If Hillary doesn't have to produce Emails, why should Tom? Very unfair!
 Great shot by  yesterday. Lebron is a tough competitor who delivers under pressure.
 “Do what you can, with what you have, where you are.” - Theodore Roosevelt
 . in 5 minutes.
 Denzel Washington gave a wonderful commencement speech over the weekend. From the heart!
 A great job by  in winning The Players yesterday. Finally, your jealous critics can go to hell! Good luck at The U.S. Open.
 I will be interviewed on  at 7:00 this morning. Plenty to talk about!
 How come there are no protests in favor of the two young police officers gunned down in Mississippi by two deranged animals. DEATH PENALTY!
 Happy #MothersDay to all the great mothers out there! 
 Big crowds, standing ovations in South Carolina - MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 My two sons, Eric & Don, have long been expert hunters & marksmen  They go on safaris & give animals to the poor & starving villagers!
 . is doing a really good job on Fox, especially when talking politics. He has come a long way fast!
 Leaving for the GREAT STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA now to make a speech about how to MAKE OUR COUNTRY GREAT AGAIN!
 . did a great job of winning tonight - played like champions!
 Thank you  and keep up the great work!
 Great job tonight 
 #TrumpAdvice 
 “Keep a good attitude and do the right thing even when it's hard. When you do that you are passing the test.” - 
 I've dealt w/politicians throughout the world. My deals are multi-faceted  transactions which involve many issues. I know the process & win!
 Tom Brady would have won if he was throwing a soccer ball. He is my friend and a total winner! 
 A strong military makes us respected by our allies & feared by our enemies. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Via  by Will Folks: “’THE DONALD’ REBUKES OBAMATRADE” 
 “Iowa hirings suggest Donald Trump serious about 2016 White House bid”  via  by 
 Via  by “Donald Trump: Don't Give Obama Fast-Track Trade Authority” 
 Via  “ eyes new projects in Abu Dhabi” for Trump Organization 
 .  It was great being with you on  this morning. So many people saw and loved the piece. Great work!
 #TBT With my friend  
 Huckabee is a nice guy but will never be able to bring in the funds so as not to cut Social Security, Medicare & Medicaid. I will.
 I was the first & only potential GOP candidate to state there will be no cuts to Social Security, Medicare & Medicaid. Huckabee copied me.
 If I run, I will be in all the primary debates and you will see why I am the only one who can Make America Great Again!
 The United States needs great deals - and fast. We have to make our country rich again in order to MAKE OUR COUNTRY GREAT AGAIN!
 .  Great job on  this morning. You beautifully stated what most people are thinking! Say hi to all.
 #TrumpAdvice 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump To Blast Obama Trade Pact In Radio Ads: ‘A Bad, Bad Deal’” 
 Via HT Politics 
 . is a total whack job who doesn't have a clue. Don't provoke the enemy, go get them and make them pay. No signals, just do it!
 I hope all of the many thousands of people who are asking me to give up so much and RUN FOR PRESIDENT will   fight hard for victory if I do!
 Our country must get very strong and very tough - and fast, before it is too late. We have zero leadership and never WIN! We want victory.
 Trump International Golf Club Turnberry, Scotland has been home to four of the greatest Open Championships in history 
 “There can be no liberty unless there is economic liberty.” – The Iron Lady Margaret Thatcher
 Follow  for all the updates on my New Hampshire political activities. Looking forward to returning to the Granite State on May 14!
 At the foot of Whitestone Bridge in the Bronx  offers  fantastic views of the Manhattan skyline 
 I am thrilled to share that the Trump Home furniture collection by  just opened a new… 
 Great story on  in  about our new Sky and Wellness Suites: 
 There is incredible progress on the site of Trump Tower Punta del Este, Uruguay, situated on the sands of Playa Brava 
 Our spa  gets a nice write-up in  #gotmilk
 What would you do if a large group of Muslims had a very public meeting drawing horrible and mocking cartoons of Jesus? Oh really, be cool!
 The U.S. has enough problems without publicity seekers going out and openly mocking religion in order to provoke attacks and death. BE SMART
 Nobody would fight harder for free speech than me but why  taunt, over and over again, in order to provoke possible death to audience. DUMB!
 #MayThe4thBeWithYou--- here is when Darth Vader and I did some firing- 
 With 46-stories and 391 beautiful rooms,  offers a wide array of AAA Five Diamond luxury options 
 Thrilled to hear that  has awarded  the 'Rakuten Diamond Award' for the 4th consecutive year! Congrats!
 Deportations are “plummeting”  while Obama continues to grant amnesty.
 If elected, I will undo all of Obama’s executive orders. I will deliver. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Looking forward to  &   Freed Summit in Greenville, SC this Saturday!
 Congress was elected last November to reign Obama in, not to give him ‘fast track’ authority for bad trade deals for the American worker!
 Via   by  “  open the National at the Old Post Office Pavilion” 
 Congratulations to  and  for the  coverage on perks in luxury hotels: 
 Our amazing golf course  
 I will be interviewed at 7:00 A.M. on  - Enjoy.
 I am the only one that knows how to build cities - pols are all talk and no action. Our cities need help, and fast. They are crumbling!
 Just got back from Las Vegas.  Hotel was fantastic in every way, but the fight was a total waste of time. The aggressor lost?
 .  Good luck tonight Floyd.
 The racial divide in our country is almost at an all-time high - and getting worse every time you turn on the television.
 Baltimore had a really tough night - only great leadership can solve the many inner-city problems facing our country. Jobs, jobs, jobs!
 .  Great insight  in dealing with the media today. You are a wonderful representative of calm and reason, a real pro!
   I'm an activist, so I'm used 2 that & I always applaud interest,but the people I know admire Trump"  Thank you, nice.
 Plans to build wind farm near Trump Turnberry in Scotland have been dropped. GREAT!     
 .  Also, the very obsolete, ugly and expensive wind turbines will never be build in Aberdeen. No longer works. 
 Beautiful, thank you. 
 “Trump: ‘Very much inclined’ to enter GOP White House race”  via  by 
 Thanks! 
 Thank you. 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump talks economy with Republicans in Davenport” 
 Via  by  talks 2016 run, jobs at  
 My  int. from  discussing how politicians have failed us & Making America Great Again! 
 Via  by  “Trump: U.S. getting beat up” 
 Whether you think you can or think you can't, you're right. -- Henry Ford
 Entrepreneurs: Don't tread water. Get out there and go for it.
 Entrepreneurs: Achievers move forward at all times. Achievement is not a plateau, it's a beginning.
 If the working, proud and productive people of our country don't start exerting their authority and views, the U.S. as we know it is doomed!
 Why is no-one talking about the horrible murder of Ana Charle by ex-con thug West Spruill. Gunned down on street, naked. Why no riots here?
 Billions of dollars spent on Baltimore and it's still a total mess. Leadership is needed, not dollars. Our whole country is going to hell!
 .  Good seeing you. Keep up the great work, never stop!
 . named   one of the “best value Michelin-starred restaurants in Chicago” 
 Congrats  for winning  Fine Hotels & Resorts 'Hotel Partner of The Year for 2014'  award!
 . is really hurting  She is boring, predictable and has zero television "it" - show no longer has ratings, dying!
 I have been a guest on The View many times when it was  successful show. Now the show is dying for lack of ratings. Too bad!
 They now say using the word "thug" is, like so many other words, not politically correct (even though Obama uses it). It is racist. BULL!
 Incredible handheld video of the Las Vegas Strip in 1969. The skyline looks better with  
 Thank you   for helping me celebrate #agreatcause  while accepting the Commandant’s Leadership award!
 Met a big fan today! 
 I am going to Iowa today - sold out crowds. People don't want our country ripped-off anymore. Must stop now!
 I wonder what the rest of the world is thinking about the United States as they watch the disgusting and out of control Baltimore riots?
 Hopefully there won't be any problems in Baltimore tonight. Be calm, be cool-do not let anybody get hurt.There is just too much to live for!
 The best social program, by far, is a JOB! Our jobs are being taken away from us by China and many other countries - incompetent leader.
 President Obama, you have a big job to do. Go to Baltimore and bring both sides together. With proper leadership, it can be done! Do it.
 Our country has to come together. We have to start working with, and really liking,  each other. The whole world is watching Baltimore.
 The Mayor of Baltimore said she wanted to give the rioters "space to destroy" - another real genius!
 Now that the ineffective Baltimore  Police have allowed the city to be destroyed, are the U.S. taxpayers expected to rebuild it (again)?
 Our great African American President hasn't exactly had a positive impact on the thugs who are so happily and openly destroying Baltimore!
 Blatant and rampant property destruction in Baltimore as the police stand by and watch. Should be a lesson on how NOT to handle riots. SAD!
 Wow, 15 policemen hurt in Baltimore, some badly! Where is the National Guard. Police must get tough, and fast! Thugs must be stopped.
 #TrumpAdvice 
 Via  by  “Trump: `The last thing we need is another Bush'” 
 My  int w/  at #WHCD on my 2016 timetable, saving Social Security & Making America Great Again! 
 ICYMI, via  by  “Donald Trump honored at Marine Corps charity gala” 
 Nobody but Donald Trump will save Israel. You are wasting your time with these politicians and political clowns. Best! #SheldonAdelson
 Will be interviewed on   at 7:00 - 5 minutes. Then I head to New Hampshire, great people!
 I will be interviewed by  tonight on  - Enjoy!
 I don't know if Hillary will be able to run, she is a walking time bomb!
 . Really important to cover currency manipulation in trade agreements - that's where China and others are beating us. Best!
 .  Really important to save National Review from going out of business. We need a true conservative voice!
 .  Not much is as "dead" or irrelevant as National Review thanks to guidance of Goldberg, a total loser! Get some real talent or fold!
 .  A fantastic guy!
 Congratulations to  on your book going to number one on Amazon. Great book - Great job!
 How do you take care of our people if you don't make anything? We don't make anything. We are rapidly losing our manufacturing to China etc.
 #TrumpAdvice 
 Looking forward to giving keynote speech tonight  Lincoln-Reagan dinner in Virginia.
 Congrats to great golfer  on his big win last week. Always been best putter. "Frost Wins for Trump"
 A beautiful article by  on my newly opened golf course in NYC, Trump Links Ferry Point 
 .  Great speaking to you today, we will speak again soon.
   Very good, must be tough!
 #TBT With Steven Spielberg in the old days- a great guy! 
 “Talent wins games, but teamwork and intelligence wins championships.” – Michael Jordan 
 It is time for DC to protect the American worker, not grant amnesty to illegals. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Why are the Republicans giving Obama fast track authority for TPP and the Iran agreement?! Obama gets more from the GOP than his own party.
 Fact – while Jeb was governor & Rubio was House Majority Leader, Florida’s debt more than doubled. Conservatives?
 Via  by  “Maryland GOP book Trump for major fundraiser” 
 Via  by  “Trump says US roads are 'falling apart'” 
 Excited to be travelling to New Hampshire on Monday. The Granite State is a model for the country. Live Free or Die!
 “Trump signs lease for a NH office, returns Monday”  via   by 
 . Thanks, my champion Geraldo--and very true.
 . 5 Star &  #1 Luxury Hotel  offers style, luxury & impeccable service 
 Do you notice that the polling establishment doesn't put me in polls, but put in folks who hardly register. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
   Thank you!
 “What counts is not necessarily the size of the dog in the fight - it's the size of the fight in the dog.” - Dwight D. Eisenhower
 China has a backdoor into the Trans-Pacific Partnership. This deal does not address currency manipulation. China is laughing at us.
 The Trans-Pacific Partnership will lead to even greater unemployment. Do not pass it.
 Republicans should not be giving Obama fast track authority on trade. The Trans-Pacific Partnership will squeeze our manufacturing sector
 The Trans-Pacific Partnership is an attack on America's business. It does not  stop Japan's currency manipulation. This is a bad deal.
 No amnesty. Protect the rule of law! Let’s Make America Great Again 
 I want to negotiate my own, and much better, trade deals for our country. MUST INCLUDE CURRENCY MANIPULATION (and more). DO NOT LET PASS!
 Congratulations to the Republicans in Congress. You are the only people Obama can out negotiate. #TimeToGetTough
 I'm getting The Commandant's Leadership Award from the U.S.Marines tonight at The Waldorf Astoria - a great honor!  
 Via  by  “ gives public a chance to hear Trump speak” 
 Via  by  “Trump to build five new holes at  
 Looking forward to keynoting  Lincoln-Reagan Gala this Friday at The Country Club at The Highlands. Sold out record crowd!
 #MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
 Ailsa Course changes: #TrumpTurnberry What a beautiful place! 
 .  You should be totally focused on trying to save the badly failing National Review instead of focusing on me. Work hard!  
 .   Wow, just looked at the stats for National Review. Dying fast, doing very little business. Save this conservative voice!
 The reason Ed Schultz said nice things about me is that I’m the only Repub who won't cut Social Security, etc. I’ll make America rich again!
 I’m a conservative, but the weakness of conservatives is that they destroy each other, whereas liberals unite to win.
 With a stupid guy like Jonah Goldberg who uses “tweeting like a 14 year old girl” to hit me, no wonder the NRO is doing so poorly. 
 People have been forced to resign positions for far less than  “tweeting like a 14 year old girl”
 . You stated that I started “relentlessly tweeting like a 14-year-old girl...”  Horrible insult to women. Resign now or later!
 “When you can't make them see the light, make them feel the heat.” – Ronald Reagan
 #TrumpVlog Trouble in paradise for Clintons- 
 Republicans have once again capitulated to Obama. This time on the Iran nuclear treaty. When will it end?
 Government can be efficient with the right leadership. Let’s Make America Great Again 
 Via  by  “Trump: 'We'll Make America Great Again'” 
 ICYMI, my speech from this past Saturday at the   via  
 Wow, Hillary and Bill are in deep trouble, but don’t worry, my fellow Republicans will let them off the hook. All talk, no action.
 Via  Interview with Donald Trump about Presidential Aspirations: It's all a deal" 
 I guess  is a lot smarter than dopes like  &  Oh well, both mags are dying anyway. 
 Wow, really nice, and unexpected, from Ed Schultz. Thank you, Ed!  
 . wrote a wonderful book, “And the Good News is.."  Dana has a fabulous perspective on life & politics—go get it!
 Glad to see that  has been hired by  as an analyst. Pete should be around baseball and in the Hall of Fame!
 Via  by  “Trump: 'I'm disappointed' in many Republicans” 
 . I heard you were a joke on the media panel this weekend in New Hampshire. You just don't  have what it takes! 
 National Review  may  be going out of business because of the really pathetic job being done by  No talent means death - sad!
 .   Sorry, there was only one "breakout star" this weekend in New Hampshire. Just check out the local New Hampshire media!
 Jonah Goldberg  of the once great  #National Review is truly dumb as a rock. Why does   put this dummy on his show?
 As I have long been saying, South Africa is a total - and very dangerous - mess. Just watch the evening news (when not talking weather).
 We are stupidly paying Iran billions of dollars that we should not be paying. Why isn't this part of the nuclear negotiations? Really dumb!
 We are getting ready to protect Saudi Arabia against Iran & others-sending ships.  How much are they going to pay us toward this protection.
 Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles will be the host in October for the  
 Congratulations to  for once again receiving the AAA Five Diamond Award for another year!
 Congratulations to  for being selected as "Best of +VIP Access 2014" by 
 .  I know your business is failing but you should try to get writers far better than 
 Thank you  and  for the wonderful and very true article, “Total Desperation on Iran” 
 How does failed writer and pundit like  with no success and little talent, get away with criticizing candidates.
 So much dishonest reporting (or non-reporting) in political media—an amazing experience for me. 
 I will be interviewed on  at 7:00 - 30 minutes. Some very interesting topics.
 Just returned from New Hampshire where the crowd was great-and got a beautiful standing ovation! Wonderful people who truly love the U.S.A.
 For all of the haters and losers out there sorry, I never went Bankrupt -- but I did build a world class company and employ many people!
 . is perhaps the most boring political pundit on television. Got thrown off ABC like a dog. At Mar-a-Lago he was a total bust!
 I do what I do out of pure enjoyment. Hopefully, nobody does it better. Theres a beauty to making a great deal. It's my canvas.
 .   Why do you have George Will on your show - he's exhausted, boring and not even a little relevant! Waste of good air-time!
 Looking forward to speaking at 1:30PM tomorrow in Nashua at   Let's Make America Great Again! #FITN
 For America to be strong again, the ways of politicians must be put in the past. Let’s Make America Great Again! 
 Via  by  "Exclusive: Trump Says Obama Shows ‘Total Desperation’ on Iran" 
 My  int. w/Don Imus on not drinking alcohol, politicians being all talk and no action & the border 
 ISIS is operating a training camp 8 miles outside our Southern border  We need a wall. Deduct costs from Mexico!
 The Republicans are funding ObamaCare and Amnesty. Obama beats them. 
 Great seeing  w/ at  for   http://someotherlink.com/
 .kimguilfoyle - great job tonight!
 Jeb Bush - “I am a conservative” = Barack Obama -“If you like your healthcare plan, you can keep your plan.”
 America will never be destroyed from the outside.If we falter and lose our freedoms,it will be because we destroyed ourselves. A. Lincoln
 Others claim they can make America great again but only one knows The Art of The Deal. It’s time for an outsider 
 Via  “Watch Donald Trump: He Is Patriotic And He Can Fix America” 
 With our brand new Tennis Performance Center,  offers countless activities along with top courses 
 Mexico’s court system is a dishonest joke. I am owed a lot of money & nothing happens.
 Rodolfo Rosas Moya and his pals in Mexico owe me a lot of money. Disgusting & slow Mexico court system. Mexico is not a U.S. friend.
 Via  by  “TRUMP: 'I'm going to surprise a lot of people' in 2016” 
 “UPDATE: Trump plans public event at   via 
 My  int. on simplifying the tax code, our incompetent leaders, Iran and making America great again 
 #TBT Trump and Gekko- 
 Via  "Donald Trump takes steps toward 2016 presidential run" 
 Our border is being breached daily by criminals. We must build a wall & deduct costs from Mexican foreign aid! 
 We have a sacred duty to care for our vets and their families. Our Vets are owed full access to healthcare anytime & anywhere!
 The top course on the west coast  overlooks Pacific Ocean & offers a luxurious public golf experience 
 Looking forward to speaking at the  #FITN Republican Leadership Summit on Saturday at 12PM! Let’s Make America Great Again!
 Had a great time in Myrtle Beach and Charleston this past Saturday and Monday. Looking forward to going back soon.
 Via  by  “Donald Trump: Don’t politicize Walter Scott shooting” 
 Part 1 of my  int. with  discussing why I am strongly considering running for President 
 Via  “Donald Trump Coming to Sioux City in May” 
 Today is April 15th, Obama’s favorite day of the year. T-E-A. TAXED ENOUGH ALREADY!
 The great  in my office with my son  
 See the amazing views from  located directly on the Pacific Ocean- 
 Marco Rubio should pick a location that has working air conditioning next time - especially when in Miami - proper plan. Sweating profusely!
 Entrepreneurs: Don't be confined by expectations. There are no exact rules for negotiation--try to remain flexible and open to new ideas.
 Entrepreneurs: In the best negotiations, everyone wins. This is a possibility, and it's the ideal situation to strive for.
 Entrepreneurs: Resolve to be bigger than your problems. Who's the boss? Don't negate your own power.
 Will be on  at 7:00 this morning - enjoy!
 How do third rate talents with no smarts like  get so much time on television news. Boring guy - really bad for ratings!
 Wow, Mitt Romney didn't  know that Rand Paul was in the race for president. Very strange! 
 A great  Masters. The course looks so beautiful. Fantastic for golf and television ratings!
 . has so many service complaints - a total joke!
 . gives terrible service and has many complaints, just check.
 Thanks  they are all total losers with nothing going for them!
 .  You service is absolutely terrible - get on the ball!  
 .  T-Mobile service is terrible! Why can't you do something to improve it for your customers. I don't want it in my buildings.
 Without passion, you don't have energy; without energy, you have nothing. Nothing great in the world has been accomplished without passion!
 South Carolina and the audience were GREAT - THANKS!
 Thank you very much for the nice story, I greatly appreciate it- 
 Spoke to a capacity crowd at Horry County Republican event earlier today. 
 Heading to South Carolina now - meeting with fantastic people!
   Thanks Mark, they will!
 .  Thank you for the very fair and highly professional segment on me tonight. Many people watched and commented.
 The NRA in Nashville today was amazing. Packed house and standing ovation for Trump. THANKS!
 . did a fantastic job on O'Reilly tonight. Way to go Eric!
 Off to Nashville and the NRA.
 .  I will be interviewed by Bret (on Fox) tonight at 6:00. Watch, it will be good!
 I will be speaking at the NRA event today in Nashville. Many friends will be there.
 Exclusive–Donald Trump: Obama 'Totally Out-Negotiated' by Iran, Taliban, 'Virtually Every Country in the World' - 
 Will be doing a big interview tonight with Bret Baier at 6:00 P.M. on Fox. Don't miss it!
 Record crowd and standing ovation at Simpson College in Iowa- lots of fun, wonderful audience!
 On my way to  to receive the AAA Five Diamond Award.
 I had a great time in Iowa yesterday- record crowds, fantastic people!
 Meeting with Iowa State Senate Leaders 
 MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Leaving now - I'm spending the entire day in Iowa - great people, great state!
 Wow, the respected Monmouth University poll has me ahead of most Republican candidates nationwide, and most people don't think I'm running!
 Many journalists are honest and great - but some are knowingly dishonest and basic scum. They should.be weeded out!
 How much money is the  extremely unattractive (both inside and out) Arianna Huffington paying her poor ex-hubby for the use of his name?
 As dishonest as  is I say  is worse. Neither has much money -  sue them and put them out of business!
 . we look forward to being with you, a truly great champion, tomorrow at Trump National D.C. for the Tennis Center dedication
 “Obama’s promises on the Iran deal are like him promising ‘if you like your healthcare plan, you can keep it’” - 
 Via  “Donald Trump to deliver keynote address at annual Chesterfield Republican Gala” 
 Via  by Eugene Dunn: “2016 is the year of Donald Trump” 
 Miami’s top destination,  remodeled Royal Palm Pool offers 18 luxurious cabanas 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump headed to Charleston” 
 Congratulations to  on being named the #ROL15  award. Well-earned & well-deserved!
 Looking forward to visiting  on Wednesday to discuss education. Common Core is an attack on individual & local rights!
 #TrumpAdvice 
 Congress must stop Obama’s reckless deal with Iran. The framework is a pathway for Iran to develop nukes.
 . admitted their scam. Phony  and others are no better-- total joke!
 Will be doing  this morning at 7:00. ENJOY!
 . have a great Easter, you are a real champion!
 I wish everyone, including the haters and losers, a very happy Easter!
 Have a fantastic, beautiful and happy Easter everyone and then, when Easter is over, have great wins and triumphs in life. Never give up!
 That Saturday Night Live is able to joke about the Germanwings air tragedy is disgusting. They should apologize to all of those  suffering!
 The Iran nuclear deal is a terrible one for the United States and the world. It does nothing but make Iran rich and will lead to catastrophe
 Via  “ Opens In The Bronx” 
 Politicians are all talk and no action. Washington can only be fixed by an outsider. Let’s make America great again! 
 Oil is under $50/barrel. Now is the time to increase sanctions against Iran, not lift them. No deal is better than a bad deal. #ArtOfTheDeal
 Via  “Trump  transformation on course” 
 Watch my  appearance from this week discussing nuclear negotiations with Iran- 
 Entrepreneurs: Practice positive thinking with a lot of reality checks. Know that goals come with obstacles.
 Entrepreneurs: Learn to trust yourself. Being an entrepreneur is not a group effort.
 Entrepreneurs: Realize that success requires 100% effort and 100% focus. Nothing less.
 Must read via  by  “Mr. President: Will you bring home American pastor imprisoned in Iran?” 
 Obama’s offer to Iran will not stop Iran’s breakout capability. It is a bad, desperate deal negotiated from weakness. Pass sanctions!
 Washington needs common sense conservative solutions. Let’s make America great again! 
 Via   by   “Trump: You're Hired” 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump: Kerry Has to Walk If Iran Doesn't Make Deal” 
 Via  “Donald Trump on Who He Likes For President: Donald Trump” 
 The townhall question segment of my  Commitment 2016 Conversation   Great questions/people #FITN
 One of the greatest tributes to a father I have ever witnessed--given to the great  by his wonderful son 
 #TrumpVlog Be careful with Iran. 
 My friend  is making a very special LP. Follow him. Conservative leader by day, likely 2015 GRAMMY winner by night. #LEGENDS
 Each day that Iran delays the deal, if that is what you call it, we must add another sanction, and make them progressively tough.
 Turn on  now  and enjoy true brilliance!
 I will be on  tonight at 8:00. Enjoy!
 I will be on Bill O'Reilly's show tonight at 8 PM--talking about Iran and politics. 
 Entrepreneurs: Gain and use information to your advantage--see every day as an opportunity to learn.
 Entrepreneurs:  See yourself as victorious. Look at the solution, not the problem. Be tough, be strong, be tenacious.
 Entrepreneurs: Ask yourself: What am I pretending not to see? There may be some great opportunities right around you.
 The right leadership can help economy while creating security around the world. Let’s make America great again! 
 “Simply take a big goal and mold yourself to become the person who can accomplish that goal.” – Think Big
 There is only one fix for ObamaCare - REPEAL & REPLACE with a free market oriented alternative!
 Via  as seen on  “Trump: Iran Nuke Talks Should Have Taken One Day” 
 Iran is desperate to develop nukes. Congress must increase sanctions against Iran.
 The border is wide open for cartels & terrorists. Secure our border now. Build a massive wall & deduct the costs from Mexican foreign aid!
 We have a sacred duty to care for our vets and their families. Veterans deserve universal access to care anywhere and anytime!
 My  Commitment 2016 Conversation with  discussing leadership, China, healthcare & veterans 
 Via  by James Q. Lynch: “Trump to run typical caucus campaign, ‘but bigger’” 
 “US tycoon Donald Trump in talks with Ryanair to bring more flights back to Prestwick Airport”   via 
 Wow, what a nice honor! 
 Via   “Poll: Donald Trump in GOP Top Tier for President” 
 “ the jewel in Donald Trump golfing crown”  via  by 
 The girlfriend of Lubitz, the  wacko co-pilot who took down the plane, knew he was insane and should have reported him. Put her through hell
 The road to success is always under construction. -- Arnold Palmer
 Looking forward to tonight's Ayrshire Chamber of Commerce Annual Dinner 2015  
 ICYMI, via  by  “Donald Trump to give Iowa speech on education” 
 “Faster And Cheaper, Trump Finishes NYC Ice Rink   Gov. can be efficient w/leadership & business acumen.
 Message to Obama re: Iran: “The worst thing you can possibly do in a deal is seem desperate to make it.” – The Art of the Deal
 Looking forward to speaking  Convention in Nashville  The 2nd Amendment is a right, not a privilege!
 Flashback  July '14:“Trump: Bergdahl Swap Another Mistake By 'Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight'” 
 Entrepreneurs: Successful negotiation means knowing what the other side wants. You've got to know where they're coming from. Pay attention!
 Entrepreneurs: When negotiating, don't be an open book. Know that the only person on your side might be yourself.
 Entrepreneurs: Seek opportunity, and see opportunity as a perk. You never know what will evolve. Keep an open mind!
 Resolve never to quit, never to give up, no matter what the situation. -- 
 Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl should face the death penalty for desertion - five brave soldiers died trying to bring him back. U.S. has to get tough!
 If Saudi Arabia, which has been making one billion dollars a day from oil, wants our help and protection, they must pay dearly! NO FREEBIES.
 Pres. Obama was touting Yemen as a great success story - it just fell. Obama doesn't know what he is doing. Saudi Arabia is in big trouble.
 Via  “Trump: Politicians are all talk no action; I'm the opposite” 
 “Donald Trump launches new men's fragrance-- "Empire" --  "Because every man has his own empire to build'” 
 Many people think that WM23  “the battle of the billionaires” was the greatest of all time—set all records
 “Americans are hungry to feel once again a sense of mission and greatness.” – Pres. Ronald Reagan
 My  int. on  with  at OPO discussing my potential candidacy & making America great again 
 Via  by  “Trump on 2016 Run: I Would Self-Fund, Appoint Wall Street Experts” 
 Via  by Eugene R. Dunn: “Iran a clear danger” 
 via  Only one man up for the job of president 
 . Favorite Miami Hot Spots   
 Jack Nicklaus II gave the best tribute to a parent I have ever heard at yesterday’s Congressional Gold Medal Ceremony honoring 
 Go to  show - will be talking about OPO and plenty else - ENJOY!
 I am on  now!
 Entrepreneurs: Take responsibility for yourself. It's a very empowering attitude.
 Entrepreneurs: Trust your instincts, even after you've honed your skills. They're there for a reason.
 Entrepreneurs: Negotiation is an art. Treat it like one.
 With  in Washington, D.C. Old Post Office under construction. Tune in tonight at 7PM EST! 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump:  'a very dishonest organization'” 
 My   int. on why I am considering running for POTUS, negotiations & making America great again 
 Will be on  tonight at 9:00. WILL BE TALKING ABOUT EVERYTHING!
 “In N.H., Trump says his business experience would play well in government”  via  by 
 ICYMI, “Raw video: Donald Trump speaks at Rep. Steve Stepanek's Amherst reception”  via 
 Via  by  “Trump says he will decide on a presidential run by June” 
 Will be on  at 7:00 - 15 minutes! Enjoy.
 . discusses our  #TrumpPets program  
 Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts.  -- Winston Churchill
 Entrepreneurs:  Let your actions show that you're the best. See each day as an opportunity to show you can do business at the highest level.
 Entrepreneurs: Learn to be succinct. Can you tell someone your idea in three minutes or less? Be clear and concise.
 Entrepreneurs: Set the example, and you'll be a magnet for the right people. That's the best way to work with people you like.
 Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles fronts the Pacific Ocean and has an 18 hole Pete Dye course. Beautiful! 
 . New York has interiors by celebrated design house Fendi Casa and 360 degree views of the city skyline. 
 Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point, an 18 hole public golf course in the Bronx, New York, is opening soon! 
 Trump Int'l Hotel & Tower, New York has the perfect Manhattan location &  is the signature restaurant. 
 THE DONALD J. TRUMP PRESIDENTIAL EXPLORATORY COMMITTEE- 
 Trump National Golf Club, Washington, D.C., is located on 600 acres and fronts the Potomac River. Spectacular! 
 Corey Lewandowski, Senior Political Adviser:  "Mr.Trump has the vision and leadership skills to bring our country back to greatness."
 April is Autism Awareness Month, join  me in raising awareness - get your  “Light It Up Blue” sign here!  #LIUB 
 Entrepreneurs: See yourself as an organization. Pay attention to every facet of your life. What's strong? What's weak? What's missing?
 Entrepreneurs: We win in our daily lives by being careful with every day, every moment.
 Entrepreneurs: Success is good. Success with significance is even better. Make your work count.
 Trump National Golf Club Bedminster, New Jersey, has courses designed by Tom Fazio & 16 acres of practice facilities. 
 . at 7:00 A.M.
 Boy did Pharrell & Robin Thicke get screwed. The Marvin Gaye song sounds nothing like theirs. Get new lawyers fast!
 Entrepreneurs: There are no guarantees, but being ready sure beats being taken by surprise. Know everything you can about what you're doing.
 Entrepreneurs: What is the standard for which you want to be known? Identify that standard & then establish it. Simple, but not easy. Focus!
 Entrepreneurs: A winning attitude will put things in perspective. Keep negative thoughts & people where they belong--out of the big picture.
 Wow, little Mac Miller has almost 100 million views on his song, "Donald Trump." Keep pushing Mac and come up with another hit - just do it!
 Trump International Hotel, Washington D.C. will be one of the world's top luxury hotels 
 The problem with the U.S. is that our leadership has no knowledge or ability to negotiate or see into the future. Every nation beats us!
 Just as I have been saying for MANY years, and while they phony negotiate with the U.S. over nuclear, Iran is taking over Iraq. Really sad!
 Entrepreneurs: Being stubborn is a big part of being a winner. Never give up!
 Entrepreneurs: Problems are a mind exercise. Enjoy the challenge.
 Entrepreneurs: Having an ego and acknowledging it is a healthy choice. There's nothing wrong with bringing your talents to the surface.
 GET READY!! The #TrumpFerryPoint tee sheet opens TODAY  10am EST on our website for April 1st-30th! 
 The Blue Monster at Trump National Doral recieved rave reviews from both players and architectural critics following the Cadillac WGC.Thanks
 An investment in knowledge pays the best interest.  -- Benjamin Franklin
 I am happy to announce that the  will be held at  this year!  Follow  for more!
 Trump International Hotel & Tower New York has received great acclaim, as has our signature restaurant, Jean Georges 
 Entrepreneurs: Remember the golden rule of negotiating -- he who has the gold makes the rules.
 Entrepreneurs: Cover your bases. Know everything you can about what you're doing.
 Entrepreneurs: Keep an open mind. Business is a creative endeavor.
 Being good in business is the most fascinating kind of art. Making money is art & working is art & good business is the best art Andy Warhol
 Great job being done by Trump and  
 The Blue Monster  was a sensation over the weekend. Really tough but players & critics alike loved it.
 . Thanks for the nice comments on Trump National Doral. I’ve long been your fan—now am an even bigger fan! 
 Will be on  at 7:00 - 5 minutes.
 Today's final round of the WGC Cadillac Championship will be amazing. A lot of pressure on leader, who has played great. Big names hunting!
 Golf is a game of respect and sportsmanship; we have to respect its traditions and its rules. -- Jack Nicklaus
 I have a tip that can take 5 strokes off anyone's golf game. It's called an eraser. -- Arnold Palmer
 The harder you work, the luckier you get.  -- Gary Player
 Mexico's court system  corrupt.I want nothing to do with Mexico other than to build an impenetrable WALL and stop them from ripping off U.S.
 Ringling Brothers is phasing out their elephants. I,for one, will never go again. They probably used the animal rights stuff to reduce costs
 Every sport evolves. Every sport gets bigger and more athletic, and you have to keep up. -- Tiger Woods
 Because of Rodolfo Rosas Moya, who owes me lots of money, Mexico will never again host the Miss Universe Pageant.
 Despite Mexico's interest in again hosting the Miss Universe Pageant, it will be because of Rodolfo Rosas Moya that it will never happen.
 I hope the Mexican judge is more honest than the Mexican businessmen who used the court system to avoid paying me the money they owe me.
 The mark of a great player is in his ability to come back. The great champions have all come back from defeat. -- Sam Snead
 Placing the ball in the right position for the next shot is eighty percent of winning golf. -- Ben Hogan
 Trump National Doral will have big crowds this weekend for the WGC. THE BLUE MONSTER IS READY FOR THE WORLD'S TOP FIFTY PLAYERS!
 The object of golf is not just to win. It is to play like a gentleman, and win.  -- Phil Mickelson
 Concentration is a fine antidote to anxiety.  -- Jack Nicklaus
 The road to success is always under construction.  -- Arnold Palmer
 We create success or failure on the course primarily by our thoughts.  -- Gary Player
 Just arrived at  for the  starting tomorrow- 
 With my friends at the great  Boost event at the  at  
 All 50 of the WORLD'S TOP 50 PLAYERS will be at TRUMP NATIONAL DORAL on Thursday - Sunday for the Cadillac World Golf Championship.
 Trump International Hotel & Tower, Vancouver, will be a fantastic addition to a spectacular city. 
 Entrepreneurs: Be tough, be smart, be personable, but don’t take things personally. That’s good business.
 Entrepreneurs: Don’t ever think you’ve done it all already or that you’ve done your best. You haven't-- so don't limit yourself!
 Entrepreneurs:  Follow your instincts and keep your focus intact. You alone know where you really want to go.
 Entrepreneurs: Paying attention can be a cost effective way of protecting yourself.
 Entrepreneurs: Look at the solution, not the problem. Learn to focus on what will give results.
 Entrepreneurs: Keep your momentum. Without momentum, a lot of great ideas go nowhere.
 Entrepreneurs: Keep the big picture in mind. There are always opportunities & possibilities, and thinking too small can negate a lot of them
 Via  by  “Donald Trump: I want to run for president ‘so badly’” 
 Via  by  "Q&A: Ivanka Trump on the Business of Golf & the Championships" 
 Via  by  Trump Slams Liberals In ‘Dishonest Press’: ‘I’m Going To Start Naming Names’" 
 Via  by  “Trump: 'I'm the only one who can beat' Hillary” 
 Via  by  “Trump sets an aggressive tone as he insisted he's serious about running for POTUS." 
 “ Exclusive – We Asked Donald Trump What Jobs He Would Offer ISIS” 
 Be sure to watch my #CPAC2015 speech with intro by  and a Q&A with  
 Via  by  "About that Donald Trump speech at CPAC …" 
 Via  by  "Donald Trump scolds Republicans: 'Toughen up'" 
 Via  "Donald Trump: ‘I Am Not Doing This For Fun,’ We Can’t Fix U.S. ‘Unless We Put Right Person’ In WH" 
 Via  "DONALD TRUMP: EXEC AMNESTY WILL MAKE ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION ‘WORSE THAN IT’S EVER BEEN" 
 Via  by  "Trump Slams Bush: ‘I Don’t See Him Winning; I Don’t See There’s Any Way’" 
 Via  by  "#REALTIME: Donald Trump Weighs a 2016 Run At #CPAC2015" 
 Interview w/Melanie Batley via Newsmax 
 #TBT With the cast of GoodFellas 
 Via  by  "Trump hires Lewandowski as presidential run eyed"  #FITN #MakeAmericaGreatAgain
 Via  by  Obama One Of ‘The Worst Things That’s Ever Happened To Israel’” 
 Via  by  “Trump says he is serious about 2016 bid, is hiring staff and delaying TV gig” 
 Trump Int'l Hotel, Washington D.C.: The iconic Old Post Office Building will be one of the world's great hotels. 
 Via  by  “Trump hires Iowan with knack for shoestring campaigns” 
 So many people are angry at my comments on Mexico—but face it—Mexico is totally ripping off the US. Our politicians are dummies!
 Via  "‘MAJOR COUP’: DONALD TRUMP PICKS UP TOP IOWA GRASSROOTS OPERATIVE FOR POTENTIAL 2016 CAMPAIGN" 
 The Mexican legal system is corrupt, as is much of Mexico. Pay me the money that is owed me now - and stop sending criminals over our border
 Trump International Golf Links and Hotel, Ireland, is located on the Atlantic Ocean in County Clare. Spectacular! 
 Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles is situated on the Palos Verdes Peninsula overlooking the Pacific Ocean... 
 The evening news broadcasts must stop talking about weather—boring and too many other topics.
 I could fix tv talk shows that are doing poorly—there is tremendous talent out there waiting to be tapped—and nobody sees it!
 Put the glamour, beauty & mystery back in the Oscars and the ratings will zoom. Also, & most importantly, the Oscars need credibility.
 I told everybody the Oscars were no good—Nielsen ratings confirmed, one of the lowest ratings in history.
 The  is a total joke & laughing stock of journalism, as is gross Arianna Huffington. They don’t report the facts!
 I have a lawsuit in Mexico’s corrupt court system that I won but so far can’t collect. Don’t do business with Mexico!
 The Oscars were a great night for Mexico & why not—they are ripping off the US more than almost any other nation.
 The talks between the U.S. and Iran are going on forever,  WORLD'S LONGEST NEGOTIATION. Obama has no idea what he is doing - incompetent!
 I told you the Oscars were terrible—bad look, bad talent—and among the lowest ratings in show’s history.  …
 Entrepreneurs: Keep your focus and keep your momentum. Believe in yourself--if you don't, no one else will either.
 Entrepreneurs: Identify your goals --  and see each day as an opportunity to show what you can do at the highest level.
 Entrepreneurs: Review your work habits and make sure they are taking you in the right direction. Don't become complacent!
 “‘THE DONALD’ GOT A MUSKET”   via 
 Trump to host #Oscars? 
 My  int. with  in South Carolina with  cadets on my 757 discussing 2016 
 I'd bet the lawyers for the Central Park 5 are laughing at the stupidity of N.Y.C. when there was such a strong case against their "clients"
 How much money are the lawyers for the Central Park Five getting out of the 40 million dollars, or are they paid  by the City (or both)?
 N.Y. City is paying FORTY MILLION DOLLARS to five men that many think are guilty as hell. So many facts -  should have been trial. Politics!
 I loved the day Paul Goldberger got fired (or left) as N.Y.Times architecture critic and has since faded into irrelevance. Kamin next!
 Why isn't Mexico releasing our Marine. U.S. should come down really hard on them. They have ZERO respect for our so-called "leader"
 Listen – my Citizens United Political Victory Fund robo-call for   #zeldinforcongress
 The  interview by Jeffrey Lord: "A TRUMP CARD - The Donald talks politics and parenting." 
 MUST READ! My  editorial: "I love Chicago ... and my sign!" 
 From the Wall Street Journal: "Google Steps Into Autism Research" re  
 “When you’re at a meeting, monitor your behavior and work at being an observer – of yourself and of others.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 “Competitive golf is played mainly on a five-and-a-half-inch course... the space between your ears.” - Bobby Jones
 #TBT Saturday Night Live 
 I actually enjoyed the piece re sign  Could it be that I’m starting to like Jon Stewart?
 . has no clue what’s going on in St. Maarten. Mullet Bay is a third world slum.
 Resolve never to quit, never to give up, no matter what the situation. -- Jack Nicklaus
 “Hook your career to a big trend. There are huge opportunities for profits if you can create big solutions.” – Think Big
 . is NYC's only  5 Star &  5 Diamond hotel w/a 5 Star & 5 Diamond restaurant 
 PM Sarah Westcot-Williams incompetence should not be rewarded. You should vote for anyone who runs against her—loser! 
 Mullet Bay Golf Course looks like a slum on the beautiful island of St. Maarten.   should be ashamed for allowing this.
 Every day St. Maarten loses vital tourism dollars due to the incompetence of PM Sarah Westcot-Williams. 
 Mexico doesn’t respect our border hourly  Release USMC Tahmooressi NOW! Time for a boycott? #SaveOurMarine
 Manufacturing is now less than 9% of US GDP. The Rust Belt, heart of our country’s factory sector, has been destroyed by our leaders.
 What took so long to catch only 1 of the Benghazi terrorists? Especially after the killer has been taunting the US in the press f/2 yrs.
 US Army Reserve  will bring Conservative solutions to DC. Next Tuesday, vote for Lee in the NY-1 primary. #zeldinforcongress
 From Fox and Friends interview: Trump: "We should not go back" to Iraq 
 Will the Benghazi terrorist use the videotape as a defense? If so, will Obama apologize to him?
 A country that cannot protect its borders is a country destined to fail. Another broken promise by our leaders in Washington.
 The exclusive home of    sits on 800 beautiful acres in the center of Miami 
 Every poll shows high approval of the new sign on  I am honored by the great support.
 AMERICA USED TO BE THE LEADER OF THE WORLD. THANKS TO OBAMA AMERICA ISN'T EVEN LEADING FROM BEHIND.
 . Spa has an array of 5 star services,12 treatment rooms & 53 spa guestrooms w/great views 
 The exclusive home of    sits on 800 beautiful acres in the center of Miami 
 Just met with the incoming Speaker of the Florida House,  – a fantastic guy! He will be a truly great leader.
 Breaking ground shortly, Trump Int’l Washington DC will bring the DC Post Office far beyond its original grandeur 
 I was right—TV ratings for US Open are way down from last year. People don’t want to look at a burned out, ugly course!
 The Trump Organization Finalizes Purchase of Legendary Turnberry Resort in Scotland. It's absolutely… 
 “No one remembers who came in second.” – Walter Hagen
 With our border not being secure, Obama is giving a pathway to terrorists to enter our country. An attack is on him.
 . TRUMP: CANTOR'S DEFEAT SHOWS 'EVERYBODY' IN CONGRESS VULNERABLE IF THEY SUPPORT AMNESTY" 
 The perfect Hawaiian getaway,  462 luxury guest rooms and suites each have spectacular views 
 I will be doing The Howard Stern Show at 7 a.m. (10 minutes). Always fun, and interesting, talking to Howard!
 It's time to let Pete Rose, the all time hits leader, into the Baseball Hall of Fame. Enough already!!!!!
 I bought the great Turnberry Resort today - considered by many to have the greatest golf course in the World. I will take good care of it!
 I know about the “rustic” look on golf courses—but see photo of highly rated Trump National Philadelphia—a real gem. 
 Success comes with hard work, focus and luck. The luck comes to those who seek it out. If you are not in the game, you cannot get lucky.
 When ISIS caught the soldiers, do you think they read them their legal rights prior to executing them?
 Iraq is no longer our problem. We never should have been there in the first place!
 Turnberry- one of the most beautiful places in the world.... soon to be Trump Turnberry, a Luxury… 
 The VA scandal will only get worse over the time. Our vets deserve the best care possible. We must be open to private solutions.
 Congratulations to  on their  championship. Well-deserved.
 If anybody else but Coore and Crenshaw designed Pinehurst they would be run out of town—(and the turtleback greens are totally unfair)!
 The only reason I am critical of the Pinehurst look is because I’m a lover of golf—and that look on TV hurts golf badly.
 Virginia's highest rated wine by   is inspired by the regions of Bordeaux & Champagne 
 The Trump Organization Finalizes Purchase of Legendary Turnberry Resort in Scotland. 
 Will be doing Fox & Friends at 7 - 2 minutes.
 Big announcement tomorrow morning concerning the great Turnberry Resort in Scotland!
 Congratulations to Martin Kaymer for winning the 2014 #USOpen. #USGA" Great playing from beginning to end!
    Matt, how many club championships have you won? I hear zero, or 18 fewer than me! Lets play for a lot?
   Matt, you know nothing about quality golf or what it takes to make golf successful. You are all talk, no substance!
  Matt, you don't understand golf (even though you think you do).I have numerous couses that are far superior to Pinehurst
   I have watched Open Championships at Turnberry, one of the great golf courses of the World. Pinehurst not in the same league
   My position on Pinehurst is correct - bad for the game, a dried out cow pasture. You have no clue but keep trying!
 Johnny Miller correctly very critical of greens at Pinehurst. Said they should be "redone"
 I'd bet the horrible look of Pinehurst translates into poor television ratings. This is not what golf is about!
   Big news from Scotland on Turnberry (which, by the way, blows Pinehurst away!) tomorrow morning. Stay tuned.
   Never in the history of televised golf has a course looked so bad and unattractive. A dry, burnt out mess! Bad for golf.
 . Remember, it was Martin K who sank the big ten footer to win the Ryder Cup. He can handle the pressure!
 I would like to wish all fathers, even the haters and losers, a very happy Fathers Day.
 . Blair, you may be the worst architectural critic in the business but thanks for your nice reviews about Trump Chicago & sign PR
 .  Have you ever seen Trump National/Bedminster or Trump International Golf links in Scotland. Both far better than Pinehurst!
 . Matt, the statement about Pinehurst looking like a local community golf course,"awful", was not made by me but tweeted to me
 .  It's true Matt, the NEW "Blue Monster" is better than Pinehurst, so is Bedminster. Turnberry & Trump Aberdeen blow it away!
 I have been very consistent and always said that Iraq would fall as soon as the U.S. left. What a terrible waste of lives and money!
 Iran will convince our incompetent President that they are trying to help us with Iraq, take over the country & oil, and "O" will say thanks
 Turnberry in Scotland is a far superior golf course to Pinehurst - and it isn't even close! Likewise the Blue Monster at Doral.
 Iran is moving troops into Iraq under the guise that it is helping out. Actually, they will take over Iraq and all of their oil. Stupid U.S.
 If you want to be successful in business, you must take risks. Make sure each risk is calculated and can have a positive fallback.
 W/ the ransom Obama paid for deserter Bergdhal, getting Mexico to release USMC Sgt Andrew Tahmooressi is much harder. #BringBackOurMarine
 Jailed USMC Sgt Andrew Tahmooressi should be released immediately. Since when does Mexico care about border security?#BringBackOurMarine
 Had a great time yesterday on  with     & guest host 
 92 stories above North Michigan Avenue,  5-Star  rated rooms have the best views of Chicago 
 Thank you  for the wonderful and honest poll results on Chicago sign. People love it!  
 . is Chicago's sole destination showcasing a Five-Star  rating for both hotel & restaurant 
 The Iraqi Army is useless. President Obama, stay the hell out of Iraq (we should never have been there in the first place).
 We should never have gone into Iraq but, once in, should have gotten out a lot faster. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 Dopey  critic fails to mention the ugly Sun Times sign.
 Before I bought the site, the Sun Times had the biggest, ugliest sign Chicago has ever seen. Mine is magnificent and popular.
 In answer to your questions about my favorite impersonator, the answer is Darrell Hammond.
 People are LOVING the Trump sign on the Chicago building. Big league tweets, letters and calls…
 A third rate architecture critic--who I thought got fired—for the failing  likes the building but doesn’t like the Trump sign
 I told all of the haters and losers long ago that Iraq would fall, take the OIL or get out fast! Massive waste of lives and trillions of $'s
 Iraq told us to get out, Iraq is now falling, and Iraq now wants us to come back! Don't do it unless we get the OIL, and I mean ALL OF IT!
 Iraq is falling apart fast - two trillion dollars and so many deaths - Bush got us in and Obama took far too long to get us out!
 Someone just asked me, who is my favorite Donald Trump impersonator? 
 BTW The Miss USA pageant was the highest rated non-sports telecast on the Big 4 networks. Congrats to our newly crowned 
 A former Miss New York is the designer behind the swimsuits featured in Sunday’s Miss USA pageant—beautiful! 
 We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, therefore, is not an act but a habit. --  Aristotle
 Shameful. After trading 5 senior Taliban for a deserter, the White House is now attacking Bergdahl’s platoon 
 Must read  editorial: “Child Alien Crisis Obama's Fault, But GOP Won't Pounce” 
 The  primary voter spoke last night in VA-7 &  won going away. Now the party MUST stand behind him! Unity Unity Unity!
 The 5-star  graces over 500 acres fronting 2.5 miles on the Atlantic Ocean in County Clare, Ireland 
 Congratulations to  on the immediate & tremendous success of his book ‘Special Heart.’ Already in its third printing!
 W/state of the art Clubhouse & our signature amenities,  brings true luxury to The Tar Heel State 
 Iraq is far worse and of more danger to the U.S. now than it ever was under Saddam Hussein - and this after $2 trillion and so many lives!
 Eric Cantor's concession speech was ridiculous - acted like nothing had just happened. WE NEED REAL LEADERS!
 As I have said, the Tea Party is alive and well and fighting hard for the USA. BIG WIN TODAY!
 Tea Party takes down Eric Cantor - REALLY BIG WIN!
 What I am saying is that we never should have been in Iraq in the first place. Bush was terrible, Obama is worse! Make America GREAT again.
 I told you so a long time ago: Iraq just lost second largest city as their soldiers drop their guns and run. Only the beginning!  OIL.
 Be sure to watch    interview from the  #HospitalityConference 
 Featuring five championship golf courses including the Blue Monster,  is South Miami’s top destination 
 Five U.S. soldiers killed in Afghanistan by so-called friendly fire. What are we doing?
 “The best luck of all is the luck you make for yourself.” – General Douglas MacArthur""
 .  Thanks M, you are doing a great job at Trump Toronto!
 Negotiation tip: Know exactly what you want and focus on that. Trust your instincts, even after you've honed your skills.
 Negotiation is an art. Treat it like one. Be open to change--it's another word for innovation.
 Negotiation tip: View any conflict as an opportunity -- this will expand your mind as well as your horizons. Persistence can go a long way.
 “The best luck of all is the luck you make for yourself.” – General Douglas MacArthur
 Watch the  video where  is crowned as the 63rd   The Crowning Moment!
 Via  by  " NIA SANCHEZ CROWNED AS 63RD  
 Heading over to the Miss USA Pageant. The young women participating are amazing and accomplished. Competition is very tough. ENJOY THE SHOW!
 The man made "climate change" that our "great" president should be focused on is of the NUCLEAR variety brought upon us because of weakness!
 The Miss U.S.A. pageant will be amazing tonight. To be politically incorrect, the girls (women) are REALLY BEAUTIFUL. NBC at 8 PM.
 No president in history has lied to the American people more than President Obama - in fact, it is not even close!
 REMEMBER, the terrible 5 for 1 trade whereby the Taliban got back leaders (killers) and we got back a NOTHING, WILL COME BACK TO HAUNT U.S.!
 The same "brilliant" negotiators that gave up five Taliban leaders for one traitor  are now making trade deals with China & others.No chance
 We have to make the U.S.A. RICH again so that we can afford to pay Social Security, Medicare,and Medicaid and STRONG to keep our enemies out
 By the end of this year China will be the number one economic power on earth and the U.S. will owe 20 trillion dollars, much of it to China!
 Just toured Baton Rouge, Louisiana - GREAT PEOPLE, fantastic place, doing really well. Miss USA Pageant totally sold out.Tomorrow night, NBC
 I am in Baton Rouge where the Miss USA Pageant will be shown live on NBC on Sunday night for 3 hours starting at 8 P.M. INCREDIBLE SHOW!
 The owner of California Gold just made a jerk (fool) out of himself. Just smile and congrat the winner. His wife was visibly embarrassed!
 .   Thank you Andrew -  so correct!
 Will be in Louisiana for the Miss USA Pageant which will be on NBC on Sunday night. Watch Miss Pennsylvania,an interesting and amazing story
 Negotiation tip #1: The worst thing you can possibly do in a deal is seem desperate to make it. - 
 Thank you to the greatest heroes   #DDay70 #WWII
 Happy 30th Birthday #Ghostbusters! It was great to have  be a part of the series. 
 Only you can #SavetheQueen during the LIVE telecast of #MissUSA on June 8 at 8/7c on NBC. Click for more info: 
 Obama is, without question, the WORST EVER president. I predict he will now do something really bad and totally stupid to show manhood!
 “Learn, know, and show. It’s a proven formula. Put it to use starting today.” – Think Like a Champion
 BREAKING NEWS:  Obama has just made a trade with Russia. They get Florida, California & our gold supply. We get borscht & a bottle of vodka.
 #TBT A picture of my fantastic father and myself. Best teacher in the world! A great Father’s Day… 
 A great Father’s Day gift—a stay at my 5 star hotel  along with items from my signature collection 
 I believe that in addition to the 5 terrorist leaders President Obama gave up for Bergdahl, a great deal of CASH was also given. So stupid!
 Amazing view of  
 Trump Collection’s summer line, exclusively available  is the pinnacle of style & prestige. Dress your best! 
 . has a wonderful new book #specialheart and it’s proving to be a great success already. Bret is a winner!
 Congratulations to  on her impressive  primary win last night. Now all should unite & defeat Bruce Braley this November
 Obama can release 5 senior Taliban for a deserter but can’t make Mexico release decorated Marine Sgt. Andrew Tahmooressi. Pathetic
 Obama betrays Israel yet again, our strongest ally in the Middle East. He will recognize Hamas, breaking long standing US policy.
 US trade deficit hit $64B+ in April, 2 yr record high  We must do better. China is ripping us. Bring the jobs home!
 . 7th floor provides the most urbane feel in Las Vegas w/private air-conditioned cabanas & a massive 110 ft. heated pool.
 I hope we never find life on other planets because there's no doubt that the U.S. Government will start sending them money!
 Chris McDaniel looks like he will win in Mississippi - GREAT NEWS and big victory for Tea Party!
 Obama never consulted with Congress about a prisoner exchange. HE BROKE THE LAW AND SHOULD BE TRIED. OUR PRESIDENT IS A TOTAL DISASTER!
 Are you allowed to impeach a president for gross incompetence?
 Was Susan Rice told to lie about Bergdahl? Obama and his representatives lie about virtually everything, from ObamaCare to a deserter.
 .  Thank you for a great and very accurate story - well done!
 Rapidly failing  magazine hits me for my strong stance against Obama's "brilliant" 5 killers for 1 deserter trade. Amazing!
 The five Taliban leaders released for a deserter must really be laughing and having a good time right now. They are saying how dumb U.S. is!
 Our President is a great embarrassment to the U.S. How could anybody be so dumb or know so little as to make the very stupid 5 for 1 swap?
 “The entrepreneur’s ability to dream, to win, lose and win again and again is often called the entrepreneurial spirit.” – Midas Touch
 Remember our six brave heroes who died searching for Bergdahl after he deserted  (h/t 
 “The problem is that no government can create real jobs. Only entrepreneurs can do that.” – Midas Touch
 It would be nice if our commander-in-chief was as concerned for our Veterans health as he is for illegal immigrants becoming citizens.
 Moving forward f/tonight’s competitive primaries, it is crucial that the Tea Party &  remain united towards November. Take the Senate!
 “It's a tough game, and you never want to take that aspect out of the game.” –  Stanley Cup Champion Mark Messier
 Airing live from Baton Rouge at 8PM ET on  2014  Competition will be a tremendous event 
 Obama’s war on coal is killing American jobs, making us more energy dependent on our enemies & creating a great business disadvantage.
 Be sure to buy this month’s  magazine. Read “A Trump Card,” my interview with Jeffrey Lord.
 Because of our terrible leaders, it is now open season on every American throughout the world. Terrorists are thrilled.
 President said we would never leave a soldier behind. How about the 4 who died in Benghazi?
 Great deal, we swap 5 killer terrorists for a U.S. military deserter. That’s how the U.S. negotiates nowadays.
 Bowe Bergdahl walked off the base after he was told not to. Solders died looking for him. U.S. should NEVER have made the deal! PUNISHMENT?
 Only a grossly incompetent government led by an equally incompetent president could have made the terrible trade for Bergdahl. #OrangeRoom
 That the Obama administration didn't know the facts about who Bergdahl was before making the stupid 5 killers for one trade is pathetic!
 Entrepreneurs: Keep your momentum going! It's a big factor in sustaining your success. Keep moving forward!
 Entrepreneurs:  If you cannot handle the tough times, you will never be successful in business. Stay positive & stay strong!
 . just got “fired”—the people spoke, ratings were terrible. The Apprentice brought him back from the dead, but he blew it!
 Another Obama disaster- 
 The statement about leaving the base came directly from CBS Evening News.
 At some point Sgt. Bergdahl will have to explain his capture. In 2009 he simply wandered off his base without a weapon. Many questions!
 The U.S. cannot negotiate with terrorists. It is a sad and terrible situation for the family involved, but this can only lead to disaster.
 President Obama created a VERY BAD precedent by handing over five Taliban prisoners in exchange for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl. Another U.S. loss!
 I am in Toronto checking the great Trump International Hotel - highest rated hotel in Canada. It is a beauty!
 #TheArsenioHallShow   Well, it had to happen. People that are disloyal, in the long run, never make it. Arsenio was just cancelled!
 “The greatest discovery of all time is that a person can change his future by merely changing his attitude.” - 
 Snowden is a traitor and a disgrace. Make no mistake, he is no hero. In fact he is a coward who should come back & face justice.
 MUST READ – via  “VA Scandal Grows As Bonuses Went To Worst Hospitals” 
 . The Spa offers 5 star services w/ 12 treatment rooms & 53 spa guestrooms overlooking the skyline 
 The American worker is being victimized by our trade policies. We need smart trade which can only be accomplished by smart dealmakers.
 Our country is on the precipice. Washington is broken. Where is the leadership?
 Our vets are the pride of our nation. The VA scandal is a disgrace.If you can get food stamps so fast, our vets should get immediate care
 The Dunes of  are a world treasure threading thru  Scotland top Par 72 7,400 yd course 
 My speech to  on Tuesday at the #NPCLunch on the topic of building a business brand via  
 Via  by  “Trump Says U.S. Brand Has Lost Its Luster” 
 Today at 1:30PM CT I will be addressing  in New Orleans  Will focus on how to fix our great country.
 #TBT Here I am with  and  
 Snowden is a liar.and a fraud!
 Have you ever seen our country look weaker or more pathetic: Snowden, ObamaCare, VA, Russia, jobs, decimated military, debt and so much more
 Entrepreneurs: Be prepared and be tough. Cover your bases! There are a lot of ups and downs, but you can ride them out if you're prepared.
 Focus on your goals, not your problems. And remember--problems are a mind exercise--so enjoy the challenge.
 My speech to  yesterday at the #NPCLunch on the topic of building a business brand via  
 . The Spa offers 5 star services w/ 12 treatment rooms & 53 spa guestrooms overlooking the skyline 
 Great  story about our conversion of the Old Post Office building in D.C. to luxury hotel- 
 “You cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today.” – Pres. Abraham Lincoln
 I am starting to think that TOP SECRET information should be done with pen to paper and locked in a safe. Too many can break into computers.
 Thank you for all of the really nice comments and reviews concerning my speech today at the National Press Club. It was my great honor!
 Like it or not, Edward Snowden is a SPY and should be tried as a SPY! He has stolen invaluable information and damaged us with other nations
 The Blue Monster is celebrated in June issue of Robb Report as the Best of the Best winner in Golf Course Category. 
 The Boston Bomber got immediate emergency surgery for a gunshot yet our vets die on waiting lines at the VA. We must do better!
 On Memorial Day, Khamenei called for ‘Death To America’ 
 The Amateur. On his trip to Afghanistan, our commander-in-chief disclosed the CIA Chief’s name. Unsafe disaster! 
 Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time. --  Thomas A. Edison
 Winners never quit and quitters never win. -- Vince Lombardi
 “Results are what matter...A series of efforts will add up to experience and achievement.” - Think Like a Champion
 Featuring private living spaces, oversized bathrooms & stunning views,  = downtown NYC’s premiere hotel 
 Close to NYC,   features one of  top rated NY courses, a 7,291 yd. par 72 
 I am speaking today at the National Press Club, totally sold out, and will then be inspecting The Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue!
 What does.Obama know about the VA or business - nothing, just look at the five billion dollar ObamaCare website. We need a real leader!
 . A really great tournament, congrats to Monty, Pete B and Ted Bishop. FANTASTIC JOB!
 . - Way to go Rory, fantastic victory!
 Have a great and peaceful Memorial Day - but remember, there are people out there who don't want us to have peace. WE MUST BE STRONG!!!!
 Rising 70 stories over Panama Bay,  offers our elite amenities in Latin Americas tallest building 
 The ObamaCare websites have cost over $5B & many still do not work  One of the greatest fiascos in modern history!
 The Obama administration gives better medical care to Al Qaeda at Gitmo than to our vets.
 The VA scandal shows the fatal ineptitude of big central planning government. When will we learn?
 Terrible for the economy & middle class, gas has now been over $3/gallon for a record 1,245 days  FRACK NOW & FAST!
 Remember our brave men & women who have fallen protecting our country this Memorial Day!
 Very excited to be addressing the  next Friday in New Orleans. There is much to discuss!
 Obama's wind turbines kill “13-39 million birds and bats every year!”   Save our bald eagles, symbol of our nation!
 Congrats to  on winning a spirited primary. Great job, Mitch.
 Via  by  " sues  for violating 1st Amendment" 
 “Exclusive: Donald Trump wants to build a luxury hotel in Dubai”   via  by 
 Via  by  "'Trump effect' will see Dubai properties rise 50%” 
 Sometimes by losing a battle you find a new way to win the war. Don't ever get down on yourself, just keep fighting - in the end, you WIN!
 Logic will get you from A to B. Imagination will take you everywhere. - Albert Einstein”
 Mike Leach's lessons, his takeaways from Geronimo's life are fascinating & useful whether in boardroom or locker room 
 Thx, and from a better quotation source: "You miss 100% of the shots you don't take." -- Wayne Gretzky
 I have been watching and loving the United States for many years and have NEVER seen it look weaker or less effective!
 Talent is cheaper than table salt. What separates the talented individual from the successful one is a lot of hard work.  -- Stephen King
 Persistence is a key for success. Don’t give up. Continue to Think Big and you will be able to close deals.
 Just returned from Ireland, Scotland and Dubai. Amazing trip, great places--but always good to be back.
 Entrepreneurs: Do your best to your utmost ability every day. Make that your standard.
 Logic will get you from A to B. Imagination will take you everywhere. - Albert Einstein
 Going now to make a major speech before some of the world's biggest investors in Dubai!
 Remember, China is not a friend of the United States!
 A classic - China just signs massive oil and gas deal with Russia giving Russia plenty of ammo to continue laughing in U.S. face.
 Entrepreneurs:  See yourself as victorious--and the best way to be victorious is to be passionate. Find something you love doing!
 Entrepreneurs:  Stay focused and be tenacious. Pay attention to people who know what they're talking about. Stay fixed on your goals!
 Entrepreneurs: Get a momentum going. Listen, apply, then move forward. Do not procrastinate. See opportunity as the perk that it is.
 With  and the Chairman of DAMAC in Dubai. 
 Hitting the first ball at Trump International Dubai, 272 right down the middle. 
 “You have to be positive every single day. Positive stamina is a necessary ingredient for success.” – Think Like a Champion
 The roads and sidewalks, airports and bridges, are perfect in Dubai. Everything looks clean & strong. In U.S.,  everything is falling apart!
 We must stop releasing hard core criminals all over the United States. Our country must be strong again!
 Getting ready for the big news conference in Dubai. It should all be happening in the U.S., but it isn't - SAD!
 I cannot believe how well certain areas are doing relative to the U.S. There is no reason for this other than poor leadership.WE SHOULD BE 1
 I am in Dubai with Damac.  PLACE IS BOOMING - AMAZING! Major news conference in two hours. Announcing luxury villas and major golf course.
 I really like Jay Z but there is trouble in paradise. When his wife's sister starts whacking him, not good! No help from B leads to a mess.
 I will be heading to Dubai where I am doing a GREAT project with Damac - will be a massive success!
 30,000 illegal immigrants with CRIMINAL RECORDS were released last year by our wonderful, though highly incompetent, government. So stupid!
 Amazing five days - developments in Aberdeen, Turnberry (Scotland) and Ireland are fantastic - the best anywhere in the WORLD. A lot of fun!
   Thanks Ronan, see you there!
 NobamaCare won't work, never will work and can't work - it is a total waste of time and energy except that it is hurting people (& economy!)
 Sorry, for all of the millions of people who long to hear my brilliant words of wisdom on Fox & Friends on Monday A.M., no go - in Dubai.
 Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower.  -- Steve Jobs
 I am in Scotland checking on my developments in Aberdeen and Turnberry. Just left Ireland, property will be great. ALWAYS CHECKING!
 Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts.  -- Winston Churchill
 Advice from my father, Fred C. Trump:  "Know everything you can about what you're doing."
 Advice from my mother, Mary MacLeod Trump: "Trust in God and be true to yourself."
 Be a yardstick of quality. Some people aren't used to an environment where excellence is expected.  -- Steve Jobs
 Via  “Donald Trump visits his newly-purchased Turnberry golf resort” 
 Be a cautious optimist. Call it positive thinking with a lot of reality checks.
 Don't wait for dire circumstances to test your quick-thinking ability. Be on alert at all times.
 “Be flexible enough to adjust to changing circumstances.” – Think Big
 If you are steadfast in your efforts, critics will be harmless. Achievers move forward, and achievement is not a plateau, it's a beginning.
 Can you conquer the Blue Monster? Book a tee time  right here 
 The only place success comes before work is in the dictionary. -- Vince Lombardi
 Do your homework. Wasting other people’s time due to poor planning or thoughtlessness leaves a bad impression. – Think Like a Billionaire
 Heading to Scotland to check out Turnberry & Trump Int'l Golf Links, Scotland. Then heading to Dubai   a great company.
 Just spent two days in Ireland at Trump International Golf Links & Hotel -- absolutely magnificent. 
 Photo from  of Trump International Golf Links & Hotel, Ireland 
 If you can’t handle the hard times that come with business then you will never be able to celebrate the successes. Focus & Stay Positive.
 It is wonderful to be in beautiful Doonbeg touring  I'm truly honored by the wonderful welcome to my family & organization
 With a world-renowned open-air lobby w/ ocean views & top restaurants,  is Honolulu’s premier hotel 
  will do great in the NFL - all he does is win! Bengals made a very wise decision.
   Thanks to you and the wonderful Simon Carswell for the great story on Trump International Golf Links, Ireland. It will be great
 Time Warner cable out AGAIN in Manhattan - no television. They have a real problem!
 Rosie O'Donnell just said she felt "shame" at being fat-not politically correct! She killed Star Jones for weight loss surgery, just had it!
 Via  by  "Wind-Power Tax Credits Need to be Blown Away"  
 Obama told his donors this past week “public opinion” is on his side. Don't believe that one either.
 Another historic first under Obama, businesses are collapsing faster than they're being formed  New leadership now!
 Must read f/ weeklystandard by  “Obamacare Myth-Making - Five phony success stories.” 
 Home of the 2022  Trump Nat’l Bedminster features 36 holes designed by famed architect Tom Fazio 
 Dennis—Thank you for being honest.  Somebody put words in your mouth & you wouldn’t take it. Great!  
 A rare case where the U.S. should help- 
 A message for Hollywood- 
 Many of life's failures are people who did not realize how close they were to success when they gave up.  --  Thomas A. Edison
 Cleveland just made a very wise decision - congrats!
 Teams are making a big mistake not taking Johnny Manziel - he is going to be really good (and exciting to watch).
    Jerry, GREAT pick - you will have a really good season!
 Great pick by Buffalo - Sammy Watkins will be GREAT!
 I think somebody should pick Johnny Football - he will be a star.
 I am watching the NFL DRAFT, will be interesting! A lot of talent but only a few will become STARS.
 To be yourself in a world that is constantly trying to make you something else is the greatest accomplishment.  -- Ralph Waldo Emerson
 “No matter how good you get you can always get better and that's the exciting part.” - 
 Remember, if you do not promote yourself no one else will. When you have success, let people know about it.
 Also, the more desperate you are to close a deal the less likely it will happen. Stay calm and focused on your ultimate goals. Be smart!
 Young entrepreneurs –  Remember that your first deals are the most important of your career. Win & gain confidence.
 Once completed in 2016,  will transform the city’s skyline with a 616 foot 63 story twisting tower 
 “If it’s worth doing, it’s worth fighting for. You’ll have lots of people & obstacles in your way. Fight to get beyond them.”–Midas Touch
 Be sure to visit the new webpage for  the Five-star #1 Rated Resort in Europe by  
 Corcoran vet hired as Trump International Realty president. We are pleased to welcome Bill Cunningham.   via 
 North Carolina’s premiere Country Club,  offers golf, tennis, a fitness facility & aquatic center 
 With four distinct dining options,  has the best selection of restaurants in Hawaii 
 “The object of golf is not just to win. It is to play like a gentleman, and win.” - Phil Mickelson 
 Thought  was a better negotiator—the Seminole Indian gaming deal is a disaster for Florida. #sayfie
 Wow, looks like  wants to hand over the State of Florida to the Seminole Indians w/ the terrible gaming deal in talks! #sayfie
 The global warming we should be worried about is the global warming caused by NUCLEAR WEAPONS in the hands of crazy or incompetent leaders!
 Dennis Rodman was either drunk or on drugs (delusional) when he said I wanted to go to North Korea with him. Glad I fired him on Apprentice!
 Crazy Dennis Rodman is saying I wanted to go to North Korea with him. Never discussed, no interest, last place on Earth I want to go to.
 “If you want to be the best, you’d better be the best – in all aspects of business.” - Think Like a Billionaire
 Russia is on the move in the Ukraine, Iran is nuking up & Libya is run by Al Qaeda, yet Obama is busy issuing ‘climate change” warnings.
 Great decision by  in placing  as chairman of the Benghazi select committee. Gowdy is a seasoned prosecutor.
 Congratulations to  on winning  Senate primary. Time for the party to unite and defeat ObamaCare advocate Kay Hagan!
 Designed by   New Villa Deluxe Guestrooms include vintage artwork of golf legends 
 Either Miss Pennsylvania will pay, her father will pay or her lawyers will pay. She hurt many people!
 Won $5,000,000 against Miss Pennsylvania, Sheena Monnin, for her terrible and untrue statements about Miss USA Pageant. Not a nice person!
 We will never have great national security in the age of computers - too many brilliant nerds can break codes (the old days were better).
 The road to success is always under construction.  -- Arnold Palmer
 Do not look for approval except for the consciousness of doing your best.  -- Andrew Carnegie
 Aside from having no ratings, sleazy Ed Schultz lied about what I said. Thank you Scott Whitlock  
 Just had a great legal victory in Ft. Lauderdale -- won trial --  now will receive tremendous $ in legal fees from losers. Love it!
 This guy  can’t do a simple interview—saw him the other night stumbling & mumbling while trying to interview a guest.
 “Do not underestimate yourself, and know you are able to handle what comes your way.” – Think Like a Champion
 Over 90% of American workers could lose their healthcare by 2020 thanks to ObamaCare. Repeal before it is too late!
 Congrats to Barack Obama on April’s job report. Over 800,000 left the work force w/average hourly wages & weekly hours staying flat. Bad!
 Celebrated for its room views by   soars a luxurious 92 stories over the Windy City 
 With the world’s top amenities,  luxury residential condominiums provide the ultimate Toronto lifestyle 
 I will be doing Fox & Friends in 10 minutes at 7.00. Many things to talk about! ENJOY
   Congrats to my GREAT members at Trump National DC on our club having been chosen to host the 2017 PGA Senior Championship!
 The ring announcers are working hard to justify the Mayweather victory. They should be ashamed of themselves! A TOTAL JOKE.
 No wonder boxing is close to dead!
 Crowd is booing the hell out of that phony decision - place is angry and going wild. Fight was not even close! DISGUSTING.
 The Mayweather decision is a disgrace!
 NO WAY, JUDGES SAY MAYWEATHER WON. INVESTIGATION SHOULD TAKE PLACE. FIX?
 Fight is over - Mayweather lost big - but lets see what judges say!
 Mayweather is getting absolutely killed!
 Floyd Mayweather is being beaten up badly through 10 rounds by Marcos Maidana, but announcers say it is even. TWO ROUNDS LEFT.
 The reporter that called Kevin Durant "Mr. Unreliable" should be fired or, at least, apologize. He is a truly great player and a winner!
 There must be a higher standard of accuracy in the media. Incredible that some so-called "journalists" can make up lies and get away with it
 Have a great weekend everyone and for those of you that are young entrepreneurs, have fun but never stop thinking of the task ahead- victory
 .  Seth can't help it - he is really trying hard but just doesn't have what it takes. Very awkward and insecure!
 Seth Myers is so unnatural and uncomfortable doing his show that you have to feel sorry for him. Bad interviewer, marbles in his mouth!
 #FlashbackFriday At Military Academy- second from left. 
 Weakness of attitude becomes weakness of character. -- Albert Einstein
 A feature on the progress of the course  #Trump Int'l #Golf Club will feature on  Thurs 8 May 2014  0930 & 1630 GMT #DAMAC
  presenter   #AKOYA by #DAMAC & the #Trump Int'l #Golf Club, #Dubai 
 “  both headed to Trump courses”  via 
 Via  by  “Donald Trump Buys Four-Time British  Golf Course” 
 Does  realize that the purpose of a magazine is to sell issues? Circulation at record low. Spy Mag also failed under Graydon.
 Never make a concession during negotiations that could lead to more demands. Be prudent. It's best to have your concessions predetermined
 Negotiations 101: The best deals you can make are the ones you walk away from...and then get them with better terms.
  Please support our #AutismMayDay campaign highlighting unmet medical needs of people with #autism  RT"
 With  circulation and advertising revenue doing so badly, rumor has it that dopey Graydon Carter is going to resign? He should.
 China will now pass our economy this year, way ahead of projections. Pres. Obama – China’s greatest asset!
 ObamaCare not only has brought higher premiums, decreased care & loss of jobs but now .1% Q1 growth. REPEAL BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE!
 Will be doing interview on  at 8.00 this morning. Will be talking about getting the great PGA Championship & Senior PGA etc.
 Wow, Vanity Fair was totally shut out at the National Magazine Awards - it got NOTHING. Graydon Carter is a loser with bad food restaurants!
 Via  “US property tycoon Donald Trump confirms Turnberry buy” 
 Excited to host two great championships at two of our best properties,  at Trump DC &  at Trump Bedminster
 Announced w/  that we will bring  to  &  to Trump Bedminster
 Getting ready for some big news with my friends at 
 “Concentration comes out of a combination of confidence and hunger.” - Arnold Palmer
 It will now start to cool down concerning Sterling and the Clippers. This mess will start to fade, after litigation, into the murky past!
 Commissioner Adam Silver made a strong and very wise decision concerning Donald Sterling.
 The premier landmark in midtown NYC, Trump Tower features our signature amenities w/a magnificent waterfall 
 .  Happy Birthday Jamie!
 Just to show you how dishonest certain reporters are, here is my  interview- 
 Dopey  should force her reporters to be accurate—if she has that power.
 It’s important to listen to what people say. “Horrible” and “disgusting” are the words I used in response to Sterling’s comments.
 It is also amazing how comments can be edited to provide statements that are used in a knowingly incorrect manner.
 A TRULY GREAT CHAMPION WILL SELDOM FAIL AND ALWAYS COME BACK. NEVER UNDERESTIMATE THE POWER OF GREATNESS!
 It is amazing that after lambasting Donald Sterling on  some DISHONEST press only reported my GIRLFRIEND FROM HELL statement!
 Young Entrepeneurs: Think Big, Stay Motivated & Always Remain Confident. The Sky is the Limit.
 Is everyone enjoying ObamaCare’s 21 new 2014 taxes?  It’s Obama’s special gift added on to your rising premium.
 Obama’s 2014 budget “eyes $1 trillion hike in tax revenue”  He loves taxes. T-E-A. Taxed Enough Already.
 Putin has shown the world what happens when America has weak leaders. Peace Through Strength!
 Watch this amazing ad from  and learn the signs… 
 Featuring the luxurious 7th floor deck with its 110-foot heated pool,  is NV's top destination spot 
 . Red Course redesign is underway. Will be completed in September. Follow all the developments 
 I will be doing Fox & Friends at 7.00 - will be discussing the the Donald Sterling (Clippers) MESS!
 President Obama is losing on so many fronts, in fact all fronts, that I am concerned he will do something totally irrational. He can't lead!
 Isn't it ironic that China is going all in nuclear for energy while at the same time making wind turbines for others. 
 If you have passion, confidence, resilience, & vision, you could become an entrepreneur. Add focus to the list & you're off to a good start
 The only  Five-Star &  hotel in NYC,  is the definition of luxury  The Best!
 We allow Japan to sell us millions of cars with zero import tax and we can't make a trade deal with them - our country is in big trouble!
 N.Y.Times headline states Obama suffers setbacks in Japan trade deal. Can somebody please tell him that with all they sell us, WE HAVE CARDS
 #TBT As a young man when I proposed the Convention Center in New York City. 
 “Worry destroys focus.” – Think Big
 “Once you know you love your job, never stop and never give up.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 “Get to know yourself.You can’t improve upon something you don’t understand.The more you ask, the better you'll know.” Vince Lombardi
 As I predicted, Obama already caught lying on Ocare enrollment # by CBO who’s sticking w/ “6 million enrollments” 
 Thank you  for naming  the #1 golf course in Miami 
 W/a newly expanded 27 holes of golfing, Trump Intl.Palm Beach is ranked by Florida Golf Magazine as FL’s #1 course 
 South Korea is absolutely killing us on trade deals. Their surplus vs U.S. is massive - and we pay for their protection. WHO NEGOTIATES?
   It was great to see you - say hi to all!
 “I'm not afraid of failing. I don't like to fail. I hate to fail. But I'm not afraid of it.” - 
 The ObamaCare enrollment numbers are a lie.They will be ‘readjusted’ by the White House at an opportune time, probably after ’14 election
 No surprise Assad is not destroying his chemical weapons. He never intended to in the first place.
 New Yorkers will get a chance to see a film for free this summer from  and  My choice? Citizen Kane #FilmForAll
 The city of Buffalo is struggling. Moving the  would be catastrophic. The Bills belong in Buffalo!
 On rugged Aberdeenshire coastline, Par 72 course is 7,400 picturesque yds. threaded through dunes 
 Interesting how President Obama is flying around in a Boeing 747 on so-called Earth Day!
 The way President Obama runs down the stairs of Air Force 1, hopping & bobbing all the way, is so inelegant and unpresidential. Do not fall!
 .  Thanks for your nice note - they love you at Trump National Doral. You are looking good - will have a GREAT year!
 Always remember, SOMETIMES YOUR BEST INVESTMENTS ARE THE ONES YOU DON'T MAKE!
 “You measure your people and you take action on those that don't measure up.” - 
 China is closing a massive oil deal w/ Russia, taking advantage of the Ukraine conflict  Smart, unlike our leaders.
 The NYPD Surveillance Program kept NYC safe since 9/11. There will be tragic consequences for ending it.
 Rep. Stephen Lynch (D-Ma) said, "There's all of these taxes and fees that are the tough medicine..it's going to hit the fan" 're ObamaCare.
 Last Thursday Obama said "investing in infrastructure would improve our economy for the long term" The next day he again stopped Keystone
 Congratulations to  on yesterday’s successful and safe  The entire country is proud.
 Get the big picture--but be prepared for the picture to change. Where there's a will, there's a win. Think positively!
 Understand that difficulties, mistakes and setbacks are an inevitable part of business and life...But always look for the opportunities.
 With two champion style courses  graces 600 rolling acres along the peaceful and scenic Potomac River 
 Fifth Avenue’s most iconic building,  features Trump Grill nestled in the corner of the Atrium 
 Once the tragic mistake of going into Iraq was made, we should have at least taken the oil (or at least some of it). Now Iran & China get it
 After thousands lost and spending two trillion dollars, Iraq (I told you so) is imploding. Really dumb pols put us and kept us there-so sad!
 “There can be no liberty unless there is economic liberty.” - Margaret Thatcher
 If America unlocked its energy potential, we would once again be the most powerful country in the world. Washington is holding us back.
 Obama told Medvedev after the ’12 reelect, he would “have more flexibility.” It was music to Putin’s ears.
 The biggest winner of Obama’s ’08 win --- Vladimir Putin. Ultimately he could be tied with Iran after Tehran becomes a nuclear power.
 A storied franchise with a loyal fanbase,  should remain in Buffalo.
 . Club of the Year, Trump Nat’l Bedminster is NJ's top family country club with two award winning courses 
 Just finished another week of filming  This season, a record 14th, is shaping up to be the best yet.
 “ ‘Trump Estates Dubai unlike anything else in the region’”  via  by Musaid Al-Zayani
 Obama through his cronies said the Keysyone pipeline was "not political" - how much can one man lie about even the most obvious things?
 I will be doing Fox & Friends at 7 (15 minutes). Enjoy it and your day!
 Huffington Post is just upset that I said its purchase by AOL has been a disaster and that Arianna Huffington is ugly both inside and out!
 Look, Snowden is bad, done tremendous damage to our country and standing - but we have far worse in our government (guess who?).
 HAPPY EASTER - HAVE A GREAT DAY!
    Frank, you are making a mistake. No one will do a better job than me and team would stay in Buffalo.
 Have to go now to sign a great and job producing deal! Good night.
 Snowden is a spy who has caused great damage to the U.S. A spy in the old days, when our country was respected and strong, would be executed
 I give Secretary of State John Kerry credit for working and trying hard, but he has zero negotiating ability!
 Remember, Russia still has Snowden. When are we going to bring that piece of human garbage back home to stand trial? He caused great damage!
 I will be working late into the evening closing a big real estate deal—soon to be announced. Happy Easter and/or Holiday to all.
 I was always a big fan of Kim Novak and still am—a wonderful actress.
 Nasty for the middle class, electricity prices surged to an all-time high this past March  FRACK NOW
 ObamaCare enrollment lie: Obama counts an enrollee as a web user putting a plan in “their online shopping carts” 
 The West Coast's most luxurious public course  features spectacular panoramic Pacific Ocean views 
 Why did Pres Obama remove sanctions against Iran prior to negotiating rather than completing successful negotiation & then remove sanctions?
 Remember, if you don’t sell yourself, no one else will. Make sure the public, friends & the business community hears about your success.
 CBO now estimates that over 2.5M will lose jobs directly because of ObamaCare. REPEAL now before it is too late.
 Oscar Pistorious is guilty as hell!
 #TBT WrestleMania 23 
 Always fun to read the  investigative piece re  his mascara and more! 
 America is at a great disadvantage. Putin is ex-KGB, Obama is a community organizer. Unfair.
 My speech from last Saturday’s   #NHFreedomSummit  via 
 My  interview w/ 
 Via  BY  " brings charity golf playoffs toTrump Nat'l/Bedminster" 
 Entrepreneurs:  Ask yourself "is this a blip or is it a catastrophe?" and your equilibrium will be kept in check if/when hard times hit.
 Entrepreneurs:  Have your own vision and stick with it. Don’t be afraid to be unique. Don’t tread water--get out there and go for it.
 Entrepreneurs: Identify your goals, know precisely what you want to achieve. Then study the best people in your field and learn from them.
 Entrepreneurs--Always remember that every day counts. Stay focused. Stay positive and develop momentum.
 I pick the best locations-  has incredible views of beautiful Lake Norman. 
 “My office is at Yankee stadium. Yes, dreams do come true.” -  Captain Derek Jeter
 Obama has changed the Census so “it will be difficult to measure the effects” of O'Care   REAL data hidden
 In Hudson Valley  course has pristine fairways, tour caliber greens & 64 strategic sand bunkers 
   Thank you!
 “Happiness is not something ready made. It comes from your own actions.” - 
 “Don’t toss off your problems, and don’t dwell on them either. Deal with them!” – Think Like a Champion
 Get Snowden back from Russia—he has done tremendous damage to the US & should pay a very heavy price.
 On top of the disrespect shown by Russia, don’t forget they still have Snowden, who has given them (& everyone) massive US secrets.
 Remember, negotiations are fluid. Remain calm and don’t settle easily. If you have the goods, you will ultimately win.
 NYC's sole hammam, The Spa at  offers classic treatments inspired by wellness rituals f/around the world 
 Via  BY Bill Smith: “GOP rally in Manchester fires up party faithful” 
 Summer's almost here, update your business wardrobe with Trump Signature Collection, exclusively available  
 Oscar Pistorious, "the blade runner," is as guilty as O.J.  I wonder if the result will be the same?
  have no doubt that you will come to your senses about the costly, bird killing and very ugly wind  turbines dotting Scotland.
 . - Ireland just ended the bird killing wind farm near my great resort on the Atlantic Ocean. The reason, would hurt tourism!
 Al Sharpton said they are "even making it more harder to register people to vote". Which is worse, his grammar or his thoughts?
 Obama lied when he said “you can keep your plan,” so why would anyone believe his bogus ObamaCare enrollment numbers?!
 Via  by  “TRUMP: ‘I WOULD BUILD A BORDER FENCE LIKE YOU HAVE NEVER SEEN BEFORE’” 
 My interview with WMUR’s  at #NHFreedomSummit 
 Big thanks to   &  for hosting me at #NHFreedomSummit. Will be back to the Granite State soon!
 On the shores of Lake Norman,  presents the true luxury lifestyle and an elite golf course 
 An appeaser is one who feeds a crocodile, hoping it will eat him last.   -- Winston Churchill
 However beautiful the strategy, you should occasionally look at the results.   -- Winston Churchill
 The people of Ireland are very smart—they just killed an ugly windfarm which would've hurt tourism  
 If the wind will not serve, take to the oars. -- Latin Proverb
 Will be doing Fox & Friends at 7 A.M. (1 hour). ENJOY!
 .  Great playing at the Masters and don't get down Jordan, you will win many tournaments and many MAJORS! Keep working hard.
 .  What a great player you have turned out to be but also, what a great guy! Congratulations on another fantastic Masters win.
 Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not to stop questioning.  -- Albert Einstein
 #FlashbackFriday With Mickey Rooney,  and  
 It's not enough that we do our best; sometimes we have to do what's required. -- Winston Churchill
 .   Congratulations on joining the finest and fastest growing group of very talented people in the City. You will be GREAT!
 Congratulations to  - I will see you on the show!
 Entrepreneurs, keep this in mind: "Great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds."  -- Albert Einstein
 Entrepreneurs, always remember that every business relationship can lead to greater deals in the future. Be sure to cultivate relationships
 Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm.  -- Ralph Waldo Emerson
 If traveling to the Windy City to celebrate 100th anniversary of Wrigley Field  is Chicago’s #1 hotel 
 Looking forward to promoting a pro-growth & positive message at this Saturday’s   Freedom Summit in Manchester.
 Into our first week of filming  the Celebrities are already turning up the heat. Major fireworks!
 #TBT On the stage during the Emmys performing "Green Acres" with Megan Mullally 
 Really looking forward to watching The Masters this weekend - one of THE GREATEST SHOWS ON EARTH!
 “Talent hits a target no one else can hit. Genius hits a target no one else can see.” – Arthur Schopenhauer
 My  interview re Jeb Bush's absurd immigration comment &   Freedom Summit. 
 Looking forward to speaking at Saturday's   Freedom Summit in Manchester. Second visit to New Hampshire this year.
 So many people don’t understand I am a big proponent of vaccines for children—just not in one massive dose—spread them out over time.
 .  you were great on  this morning—& the Gary Player Villa at  is a hot ticket.
 The Blue Monster at Trump National Doral in Miami is doing record business - everybody wants a piece of it. Great reviews. Thank you!
 .  How much money did your dopey brother pay you to say that - he's got no clubbed speed, but give him my warmest regards anyway!
 . says he is a member of Dallas National but doesn’t play golf. Who is a member of a golf club that doesn’t play?? No talent! 
 Saw  try to hit a ball in Lake Tahoe while I played in tournament- he’s got no talent or strength!!!! 
   Kim, keep up the great work - you are really doing well!
 It's 4.35 a.m. and I am working on a very exciting (and hopefully very good) deal - a major resort. THE HARDER I WORK, THE LUCKIER I GET!
 Launching the Trump Home by Dorya Furniture Collection today. It looks amazing!   
 Will be on Fox & Friends at 7.00 this morning - ENJOY!
    Thanks Xena!
 .  Great job in winning your first of many "majors". We are proud of you at Trump International. Work hard - be an all time great!
 Haters and losers say I wear a wig (I don't), say I went bankrupt (I didn't), say I'm worth $3.9 billion (much more). They know the truth!
 Major League Baseball was really smart when they wouldn't let Mark Cuban buy a team. Was it his financials or the fact that he's an asshole?
 For China, of all nations, to search the massive Indian Ocean and pick up the ping from the black box of flight 370 sounds a bit far fetched
  Thanks Kat!
 I hate what has happened to the once great 
 I can't believe that  would waste time and money with  - he has got nothing going. Jeff Zucker must be losing his touch!
 . one of my favorite musicians- in my office. 
 .  Thanks for your nice words. You are a real champion. I’m pushing!
 I can't believe David Letterman has announced his retirement--he is a great guy! 
 Ask yourself: "What can I learn today that I didn't know before?" Always be a student, always be open to new ideas.
 I hear the very ungrateful  has a show that is absolutely dying in the ratings. Really too bad!
 Entrepreneurs: Watching you could be the motivation for your employees.Make it an example that will best serve the success of your business.
 Entrepreneurs: Pay attention to details. If you don’t know everything about what you’re doing, you'll be in for some big surprises.
 Entrepreneurs: Be cautiously optimistic.  Call it positive thinking with a lot of reality checks.
 Visit the highly acclaimed Trump International Hotel & Tower Chicago and its exceptional 'Sixteen' restaurant 
 Today in history WrestleMania 23: I shave  hair--highest rated show in WWE history   
 The signature restaurant of   is both a Forbes Five-Star & AAA Five-Diamond restaurant 
 Yesterday in front of Rockefeller Center 
 In New York, March was the coldest month in recorded history - we could use some GLOBAL WARMING!
 Noisy windfarm driving community crazy!    
 Because of President Obama's failed leadership, we have put Vladimir Putin & Russia back on the world stage! --No reason for this.
 Sorry, couldn't do  this morning--big meeting. Will double up next week at 7.
 .  Good luck with the Dodgers this season, if they were like you they would never lose a game!
 .  Keep up the great work and congrats - we are proud of you!
  Your new TRUMP tower in Vancouver looks fantastic. I'm gonna pick up a unit. Just can't say no to 5-star living #motivation"
 . - How quickly people forget, but not me! You told me that without The Apprentice you could never have gotten your show - Sad!
 . - The only thing you don't mention in the nice Esquire piece about you is The Apprentice, without which you would be nowhere!
   for president - it's reality, he is reality and he is the ONLY one capable of making the necessary changes
 To all haters and losers: I am NOT anti-vaccine, but I am against shooting massive doses into tiny children. Spread shots out over time.
 To all young (and old) entrepreneurs: Believe in yourself, talk yourself up! Energize yourself and you'll energize others.
 Entrepreneurs:  Believe in yourself. If you don’t, no one else will either. Realize that becoming an entrepreneur is not a group effort.
 Entrepreneurs:  Another question to ask yourself—“What am I pretending not to see?” There may be great opportunities right around you.
 For Entrepreneurs: A good question to ask yourself –“What can I provide that does not yet exist?”
 SSE slashes offshore wind investment—wants British government to pay for its losses on these monstrosities 
 Join  and light the world blue on 4/2. #LIUB will raise awareness for millions with autism!
 With autism being way up, what do we have to lose by having doctors give small dose vaccines vs. big pump doses into those tiny bodies?
 Healthy young child goes to doctor, gets pumped with massive shot of many vaccines, doesn't feel good and changes - AUTISM. Many such cases!
 Coach W to his basketball players - BE QUICK BUT DON'T HURRY!
 If I were President I would push for proper vaccinations but would not allow one time massive shots that a small child cannot take - AUTISM.
 Autism WAY UP - I believe in vaccinations but not massive, all at once, shots. Too much for small child to handle. Govt. should stop NOW!
 #TBT For all who have been asking, my mother was a great beauty and a wonderful person. Here we are with my father- 
 . is terrific--congratulations on Hall of Fame.
 Remember, oftentimes the best deal you make is the deal you don't make!
 Listen to my interview with  at  - 
 I will be ON THE RECORD with Greta Van Susteren  tonight at 7 pm eastern/FOX News Channel
 Some great quotes from the legendary and courageous Winston Churchill: "Never, never, never give up." ...
 If you’ve looked over the years,I’ve been right on virtually every issue from Iraq (not going in but if so taking the oil) to jobs to China
 By Obama mentioning Manhattan yesterday in his response, he has singlehandedly made it target #1. How totally stupid is this guy?
 This is the time for the United States to be strengthening all important military components - not rolling over and dealing from weakness!
 Not good or smart for Obama to be calling Russia a "regional" power or to mention the concept of a nuclear weapon going off in NYC.
 President Obama looks absolutely exhausted in the Netherlands. He is not a natural leader, was never ment to lead - it is tough work for him
 Robert Slater, who just passed away, was a terrific writer who wrote a very fair book about me. He will be missed. 
 Getting to the point is appreciated by everyone. Here's some advice for public speaking: "Be sincere; be brief; be seated."  F.D. Roosevelt
 I had a great time answering your questions in the latest #AskTheDonald. Watch and see if your question made it in- 
 Thank you to  & Sports Illustrated   for the really nice piece about me. March 17, 2014 issue 
 Obama should stop running down the stairs when getting off Air Force One.  Doesn’t look presidential and at some point he will take a fall.
 I wonder if Apple is upset with me for hounding them to produce a large screen iPhone. I hear they will be doing it soon—long overdue.
 Obama must now FOCUS, get his mind off "March.Madness", and LEAD! Watch Russia closely, work hard on the economy and get rid of ObamaCare!
 The situation with Russia is much more dangerous than most people may think - and could lead to World War III. WE NEED GREAT LEADERSHIP FAST
 We should be building up our military and our missile defense systems to their highest levels ever. Must be very strong to prosper & survive
 I believe Putin will continue to re-build the Russian Empire. He has zero respect for Obama or the U.S.!
 Putin has become a big hero in Russia with an all time high popularity. Obama, on the other hand, has fallen to his lowest ever numbers. SAD
 Great advice from my mother: “Trust in God and be true to yourself.” – Mary MacLeod Trump
 Great advice from my father: "Know everything you can about what you're doing." -- Fred C. Trump
 President Obama, be cool, be smart, be sharp and FOCUS (no more March Madness), and you can beat Putin at his own game. IT CAN BE DONE!
 While Putin is scheming and beaming on how to take over the World, President Obama is watching March Madness (basketball)!
 I don't hate Obama at all, I just think he is an absolutely terrible president, maybe the worst in our history!
 We're spending a fortune looking for the lost plane with mostly Chinese passengers, and that's OK-but how much are Russia & China spending?
 President Obama was able to fool the Americans by getting elected, but not able to fool Vladimir Putin. Too bad for us!
 We are excited to announce Trump Estates at Akoya by DAMAC, luxury villas situated byTrump Int’l Golf Links Dubai 
 Looks like plane may have been found in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Australia.
 Lithium ion batteries should  not be allowed to be used in aircraft. I won't fly on the Boeing 787 Dreamliner - it uses those batteries.
 Plane was carrying those terrible lithium ion batteries, which are highly combustible, as cargo. Fire could have started in cockpit.
 It's almost like the United States has no President - we are a rudderless ship heading for a major disaster. Good luck everyone!
 . Wind turbines are ripping your country apart and killing tourism.Electric bills in Scotland are skyrocketing-stop the madness
 Head on over to my Facebook page to have your questions answered in the next #AskTheDonald- 
       Thanks Dan
 Re Negotiation: Know what you want & think about what the other side wants. Know where they’re coming from & do not underestimate them.
 The Donald J. Trump Signature Collection's new line is out  --ties, shirts, accessories -- great & going fast! 
 Business is an art in itself & powerful negotiation skills are one of the techniques necessary to facilitate success.- Think Like a Champion
 Is this what we really want in Aberdeen? Wind turbines are destructive to tourism etc.   
 President Obama could totally solve the problem with Putin by demanding that Russia sign on to ObamaCare, thereby destroying their economy!
 Wow, Putin is really taking advantage of President Obama. It is important that Obama responds with strength and determination-be smart-cool!
 Some people dream of great accomplishments while others stay awake and do them!
 5 year old Trey has terminal cancer. I'm helping him go to Disney, won't you? 
 There are many editorial writers that are good, some great, & some bad. But the least talented of all is frumpy Gail Collins of NYTimes.
 Join  and light the world blue on 4/2. #LIUB will raise awareness for millions with autism!
 “Some people dream of great accomplishments, while others stay awake and do them.”   Anonymous
 I won't be doing Fox & Friends tomorrow morning in that I have a big breakfast meeting on a deal. I will be back next week at 7. Thank you!
 When nobody wanted the UFC, I opened the way by letting them fight at the Trump Taj Mahal in Atlantic City. Dana White has done a great job!
 Frumpy and very dumb Gail Collins, an editorial writer at The New York Times, is so lucky to even have a job. Check her out - incompetent!
 .  As a true champion you must have enjoyed how difficult but fair The Blue Monster played last weekend. Gary Player Villa loved!
 While I won't be running for Governor of New York State, a race I would have won, I have much bigger plans in mind- stay tuned, will happen!
 The top leadership of the New York State Republican Party is totally dysfunctional - they haven't won a major election in many years.
 I have clearly stated that if the New York State Republican Party is able to unify, I would run for Governor and win. They can't unify -SAD!
   Thanks!
 AMAZING how the press protected President Obama when he did the so-called comedy routine with Zach G. He looked like a fool - they said cute
 I just beat a lawyer from Yale and a lawyer from Harvard, who teamed up against me, in a major case worth millions ($). They were so dumb!
 Just did theToday Show to announce that Baton Rouge, Louisiana will host the Miss USA Pageant on Sunday, June 8th.  USA.
 Trump Victorious in Fort Lauderdale Litigation 
 Congratulations to  for the two top rentals in 2013!    #TIRNYC
 Wow, the two highest apartment rentals in all of 2013 were at Trump Park Avenue—each one = $100,000 per month 
 I love taking lawsuits all the way when I’m right.   is finding that out the hard way!
 With the complete Ft. Lauderdale victory, I will now sue for millions of $’s in attorney fees for which plaintiffs are liable.
 JUST IN:  A jury awarded a complete and total victory in buyer’s remorse lawsuit against me in Ft. Lauderdale.
 Have passion, drive, and enthusiasm? You can check out the  careers here: 
 The massive Blue Monster  is getting rave reviews. I built it in one year—no easy feat!
 I’ve been watching very little  lately—the good news is I’m switching over to   and 
 Other  worthy people were taken off the  list as well. Stupid poll should be canceled—no credibility.
 The #CNBC 25 poll is a joke. I was in 9th place and taken off. (Politics?) No wonder  ratings are going down the tubes.
 Congratulations to Patrick Reed for winning at Trump National Doral. He told me The Blue Monster is "the best course I've ever played"
 Will be on Fox & Friends at 7 (10 minutes). ENJOY!
 Leaders at Trump National Doral are only one under par. The great Ben Hogan said, "I've never seen a great course that was easy!"
 The newly built Blue Monster at Trump National Doral is being considered a "masterpiece" by almost all who see it and play it - THANK YOU!
 I’ll be at the Blue Monster at Trump National Doral all weekend watching the Cadillac World Championships.  
 I am at  watching the Cadillac World Championships. The Blue Monster is playing tough against the world’s greatest golfers.
 Congrats to  and  I really enjoyed being there—the response was so terrific!
 Proud to be honored at reception celebrating entrepreneurship with Citizens United at CPAC. 
   Thanks Sasha!
 The unbiased reporters and attendees said mine was the best and most well received speech at CPAC - THANK YOU!
 Actually I was very nice to Jimmy Carter during my standing room only (& standing ovation) speech for CPAC - stated better Pres. than Obama!
 Of course I don't think Jimmy Carter is dead-saw him today on T.V. Just being sarcastic, but never thought he was alive as President, stiff!
 Trump International Hotel & Tower Toronto continues to receive accolades. Great city, great hotel.    #TrumpToronto
 Elite Traveler & the 12 Best Hotel Room Views in the World   #TrumpChicago
 Success breeds success. The best way to impress people is through results. -- Think Like a Billionaire.
 The opening of the  Villa at trumpdoral 
   Charlie, sounds good to me!
  Thanks Colleen!
 Live on the edge--no complacency is allowed--and keep an open mind. Business is a creative endeavor.
 If you're passionate about your work, you will never give up.
 Remember to keep going--if you stop, your momentum will stop.
 . The 2 people I am most excited to hear speak on Thrursday at  is  &  #DCBound" Thanks.
 Actually Putin doesn't want Alaska because the Environmental Protection Agency will make it impossible for him to drill for oil!
 What do you think Obama will do when Putin seizes Alaska?
 Baltimore just set a record for the coldest day in March in a long recorded history - 4 degrees. Other places likewise. Global warming con!
 . Romney strongly stated, in one of the debates with Pres. OBAMA, that Russia is the big problem. Obama scoffed. Mitt was 100% correct!
 New York Magazine just named the most influential "tweeters" in N.Y. and one Donald Trump was #2 after ESPN. Actually, I'm easily #1!
 . It was great having you play The Blue Monster. Thanks for your nice statements-many agree that it is best they've seen!
 Very exciting week for  I will be in Miami opening what will soon be best resort in U.S. World Golf Championship this week!
   Ellen, you should get rid of Andy Lassner - the guy has absolutely no imagination or talent. Good try last night!
 I have always liked Ellen, done her show numerous times, but she was not good last night - fumbling and stumbling!
 Ellen was so awkward and insecure last night. The pizza skit was terrible. She should dump Andy Lassner, a guy with no absolutely no talent!
 What is he reading? #Oscars
 M.M. is a good choice - also, nice guy! #Oscars
 Angelina and Sidney had a really strange vibe going! #Oscars
 Was President Obama in charge of this years Academy Awards - they remind me of the ObamaCare website!  #Oscars.
 This is Amateur Night - who the hell is in charge of this production? #Oscars
 This cannot be the the Academy Awards #Oscars AWFUL!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
 They should have allowed applause during the TRIBUTE to the departed - Really bad production. Bette Midler sucked! #Oscars
 Little Andy Lassner, who lives his life through Ellen and has nothing else going for himself, is having a really bad night! #Oscars
 Judy Garland was much better, to put it mildly! #Oscars
 I don't know how much longer I can take this bullshit - so terrible! #Oscars
 Ellen is sadly having a hard time with her lines. #Oscars
 Do you believe this singing? #Oscars
 Which is worse and which is more dishonest - the #Oscars or the Emmys?
 They must be kidding - can this be happening #Oscars
 Certain people are ruining their reputations tonight-really sad! #Oscars
 I should host the #Oscars just to shake things up - this is not good!
 Just terrible! #Oscars
 Is this boring or is it just me? #Oscars
 I'm having a real hard time watching the Academy Awards (so far). The last song was terrible! Kim should sue her plastic surgeon! #Oscars
 I am at Trump National Doral in Miami as the best golfers in the World start arriving for the World Golf Championship (Cadillac). A big week
 Sissy Graydon Carter of failing Vanity Fair Magazine and owner of bad food restaurants has a problem-his V.F. Oscar party is no longer "hot"
 Will be playing golf today with Rand Paul at Trump International in Palm Beach. Will be both interesting and fun!
 China has just intervened to lower the yuan- in other words, they will continue to screw the U.S.!
 By popular(extremely) demand, I will be live tweeting the #Oscars2014 on Sunday night. Tell all your friends I will not be pulling punches!
 . and his incredible wife  did a fabulous movie,  see it!
 I'll be playing golf tomorrow in Palm Beach at the number one rated golf course in the State of Florida, Trump International Golf Club.
 The World is falling apart around us, but we don't have people who know how to play the game. The U.S. is in big trouble - no leadership!
 The U.S. has appealed ro Russia not to intervene in Ukraine - Russia tells U.S. they will not become involved, and then laughs loudly!
 Obama just stated "he didn't take school seriously, made bad choices and GOT HIGH" - then how the hell did he get into Columbia & Harvard?
 Congrats to R. Emmett Tyrrell, Jr of  for the fantastic piece on Benghazi. 
 Lightweight  phony lawsuit against Trump U was decimated by the court—he’s a loser!
 Black politicians are in prison based on Shirley Huntley’s statements but not white  RACISM! 
 I think the  was far too nice to sleazebag  He’s got plenty more to worry about!.
 Congrats to R. Emmett Tyrrell, Jr of  for the fantastic piece on Benghazi.
 Congrats to Charles  for his statements on climate change, formerly known as global warming!
 . has never once said that he didn’t ask for campaign contributions during the investigation.
 Disappointed the  article on  did not bring up his dealings w/ Shirley Huntley. 
 Success tip:  Keep the big picture in mind. There are always opportunities & possibilities, & thinking too small can negate a lot of them.
 Success tip: Don't tread water. Get out there and go for it. There's nothing wrong with bringing your talents to the surface.
 Success tip: Achievers move forward at all times. Achievement is not a plateau, it's a beginning.
 Lightweight  is driving business out of NY so that he can get publicity for his failing political career.
 Wow, NY Observer story about  really exposes him as a sleazebag & crook. He’s bad for New York. 
  Great advice. My Dad (also a developer) always reminded me that "we're in the problem solving business."  So true!
 Just did final purchase on fabulous  in Ireland. Will become Trump International Hotel & Golf Links, Ireland. Very exciting!
 To aspiring entrepreneurs: Be tenacious. Once you've decided on your goals, remain fixed on them. Set the bar high!
 To aspiring entrepreneurs:  Be ready for problems. You'll have them every day. So remember to look at the solution--not the problem.
 To aspiring entrepreneurs:  Trust your instincts. They are there for a reason.
 To aspiring entrepreneurs:  Be focused! Know your goals. Put everything you've got into what you're doing--every single day.
 Models! Remember to register for the Trump Model Search. Check out the info here:  
 Congrats  on fantastic article--when “B” writes so nicely about you, it really means something. 
 With the World hating us and wanting to destroy the U.S., we have just cut the hell out of the military budget, making it smallest since '39
 Iraq buying $200,000,000 worth of weapons from Iran. Despite so many killed and trillions spent, Iraq dumps U.S. I TOLD YOU SO LONG AGO!
 Building a personal brand? Then focus on being great. Focus on being the best at what you do. Excellent article: 
 Entrepreneurs: Keep your momentum. See yourself as victorious and leading a winning team. Keep everyone moving forward.
 Entrepreneurs:  Don't expect anyone to be on your side. Sometimes we're all in this alone. So believing in yourself is mandatory.
 Entrepreneurs:  Everything starts with you. Leadership is not a group effort--if you're in charge, then be in charge.
 We could make America great again by spreading ObamaCare throughout the World while at the same time  dropping it from U.S.!
 Whether you like it or not, the Russians did a great job in hosting the Olympics! Remember when Obama went to Europe to get Olympics-fourth.
 Will be doing Fox & Friends at 7 A.M. - 20 minutes. ENJOY!
 Russia beat the United States in the Olympics-another Obama embarrassment! Isn't it time that we turn things around and start kicking ass?
 Do you think that very dumb reporter(blogger) McKay Coppins has apologized to his wife for his very inappropriate behavior while in Florida?
 . - You have done an amazing job - I am proud to have been there at the very beginning!
 .  Great seeing you last night at record setting Mar-a-Lago Republican event. The crowd loved you!
 . Thank you for all of your support, you have been amazing!
 .  I created far more jobs and success in Dutchess than you--you should be "Fired."
 I took a failed club in Dutchess County & made it a great success plus many jobs.  should be thankful.
 . can create tens of thousands of jobs by approving casinos in Miami--it's time. 
 Individual commitment to a group effort  is what makes a team work, a company work, a society work, a civilization work. -- Vince Lombardi
 A poll of the Miami-Dade was conclusively in favor of gambling in Miami.     
 Governor Cuomo is right about one thing - Attorney General Eric Schneiderman does wear eyeliner! What the hell is up with him?
 “   how nice of this punk with a pen to call a truce after he tries to show u up w/his bs!"  True, thx
 “ So fucking sick of the Middle East I agree with Trump if we're spending $ over there might as well take their oil"
   Actually, I like you!
 Thank you to Jeffrey Lord  for his incredible & insightful article this weekend on failing & irrelevant 
 For the NY State Repubs to waste time, energy and money on a primary—then go against 3-1 Dems—is insane.
 Thank you to Matt Boyle   for analytical & well written piece on sleazebag blogger  & irrelevant 
 NY State Republican Party must unify or November will be another disaster.
 Internal polling shows that I would swamp   in a NY Republican primary 77% to 23%. But won’t run if party is not unified.
 .   Gaming in Miami will be incredible—best in world and create lots of jobs and revenue.
 .  Gaming states are laughing at stupidity of not approving gaming in FL—they’re afraid of Miami—can’t believe their luck!
 I read  comments that “the lights are dimming on gambling in Florida”—nothing could be worse for the state.
 . sought my support after he released terrorist Al Megrahi, who blew up Pan Am #103, killing all aboard. I said “no way!”
 My friend  was fantastic on the  this morning—a star!
 Isn't it crazy, I'm worth billions of dollars, employ thousands of people, and get libeled by  moron bloggers who can't afford a suit! WILD.
  did a great job of destroying the little remaining credibility of  and the very dumb Ben Smith.
 I wonder how much money dumb  and even dumber Ben Smith loooose each year? They have zero credibility - totally irrelevant and sad!
 Ben Smith (is that really his last name?) of  is a total mess who probably got his minion Coppins to do what he didn't want to do?
 Amazing story in  about the sleazebag blogger Coppins who fabricated nonsense about me for irrelevant  CONGRATS!
 Bloggers like McKay Coppins &  are true garbage with no credibility. Record setting crowds & speech not reported. 
 Thank you Jeffrey Lord for the great article discrediting third rate  site & slimebag reporter McKay Coppins. 
 A legitimate article about me... 
 It's not climate change,it's global warming.Don't let the dollar sucking wiseguys change names midstream because the first name didn't work
 Do you think John Kerry is aware of the fact that they are building nuclear weapons in Iran and North Korea and  Pakistan already has them!!
 Do you believe this one - Secretary of State John Kerry just stated that the most dangerous weapon of all today is climate change. Laughable
 Don't let the GLOBAL WARMING wiseguys get away with changing the name to CLIMATE CHANGE because the FACTS do not let GW tag to work anymore!
 Due to the holiday, I will NOT be doing Fox & Friends this morning. Next Monday at 7.
   Never said it, a total misquote.
 I never equated wind farms to the Pan Am Lockerbie disaster - only stated that  should never have released the terrorist - BAD!
 How come discredited reporter  refused to write that the events in New Hampshire, Buffalo and N.Y. were all record breakers!
  is a failed and dishonest reporter who refuses to mention the sarcasm in my voice when referring to him or irrelevant buzzfeed
   One of the great places on the planet,  and will only get better now that I own it and will be investing large sums in it!
 The brand new Blue Monster Golf Course at Trump National Doral is doing fantastic business. Also, the new driving range is open at night!
 A dishonest slob of a reporter, who doesn't understand my sarcasm when talking about him or his wife, wrote a foolish & boring Trump "hit"
 Set the bar high--do the best you possibly can. Be focused, disciplined and alert every single day.
 Vote by 3/31 for your travel favorites in  #TLWorldsBest      Awards 
  #BlueMonster looks fantastic. Great time at the Grand Opening, now looking forward to the 
  Happy Birthday!
 I hope that Derek Jeter has such a fantastic year with  that he changes his mind about retiring. Great guy!
                         2014|"ianmccormack10                          great bit of business buying Doonbeg. Outstanding course & part of the country" Thx
 The Irish government is too smart to destroy their beautiful coastline w/ bird-killing, ugly wind turbines.  
 My new club on the Atlantic Ocean in Ireland will soon be one of the best in the World - and no-one will be looking into ugly wind turbines!
 Do you believe the way Karzai talks down to the United States - zero respect!
  Thanks Dan.
 Give your goals substance -- make them count on as many levels as you can. Remember that passion can be the catalyst for great achievement.
 A big part of the country, even the southern states, is under massive attack from snow and freezing cold. Global warming anyone?
 Our clubhouse facility & suites in Ireland   #TrumpIreland  http://someotherlink.com/
 Great making keynote speech at 2014 Lincoln Day Dinner, hosted by Dan Isaacs & NY Republican County Committee. Wonderful  people!
 If Scotland doesn’t stop insane policy of obsolete, bird killing wind turbines, country will be destroyed.  
 My sons, Don and Eric, are in Ireland looking at my new club. It will be phenomenal!  
 If ObamaCare is such a wonderful law then why does Obama summarily  change the law before an election?
 Make it special!  No better place to celebrate St. Patrick's Day in the Windy City than  
 My sons Don and Eric are right now at Doonbeg in Ireland. There will be nothing like it!
 The people of Ireland have been so great about my purchase of Doonbeg -- I'll be there soon. 
 “Trump's Championship #BlueMonster Course Opens To Rave Reviews”   via 
 Looking forward to addressing the record setting crowd tonight at the New York County Lincoln Day Dinner. Lots to talk about!
 Great purchase in Ireland--- will be a top spot! 
 “Remember to keep going: if you stop, your momentum will stop.” – Think Big
 W/ views of NYC's skyline, Trump Stamford is Connecticut’s most luxurious high rise, featuring Trump amenities 
 Governor Cuomo only cut the Verrazano Bridge tolls because I made it a major point in speeches. I love the people of Staten Island!
 Anytime you see someone talking about celebrity weight loss on my "twitter" it is a total scam!
   True and thanks!
   Thanks Kasey!
 Doing Fox & Friends at 7.00 A.M. ENJOY!
 I've been saying for three months that the bridge tolls to Staten Island are far too high and unfair-just got lowered, but not nearly enough
   But nobody asked-a great school!
 Via  by  “Donald Trump reopens Doral's Blue Monster” 
 46 stories above downtown New York,  features loft-inspired interiors designed by Fendi Casa 
 How does frumpy & little read  editorial writer Gail Collins keep her job? She is totally irrelevant! 
 Never allow your attitude to be a liability. Be positive and strong. Set your mind on winning-- and keep it there.
 Negotiation: It is persuasion more than power.
 The Blue Monster Golf Course officially opens tomorrow at Trump National Doral with a ribbon cutting ceremony. GREAT COURSE, GREAT REVIEWS!
 Wow, just in - ObamaCare projected to cause large scale drop in jobs - even Dems are shocked by 2.5 million number. DISASTER!
 When will our country stop wasting money on global warming and so many other truly "STUPID" things and begin to focus on lower taxes?
 Massive record setting  snowstorm and freezing temperatures in U.S. Smart that GLOBAL WARMING hoaxsters changed name to CLIMATE CHANGE! $$$$
 Congress should be worried about American workers not people who came into our country by breaking our laws.
 CBO estimates over 2.3M jobs will be lost due to ObamaCare  Elections have consequences.
 Congrats to Pres.Obama and Dems. CBO has TRIPLED its estimate of working hours lost due to ObamaCare  Job Killer
  highest rated wine in VA,  uses gentle techniques to produce quality wines 
 In 2016, the Old Post Office will be fully transformed into an iconic destination, Trump Int'l Washington DC 
 Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time. --Thomas A. Edison
 Wind energy is a complete economic disaster….      
 Rio de Janeiro joins the  in 2016. It’s going to be a spectacular hotel! 
 The President of the U.S. is the leader of the Free World. He should dress like it at all times. Wear a suit and a tie for major interviews.
 The  comes to Miami on March 6th when the  returns to   See you there!
 Watch commodity prices soar because of the freezing cold. Will be bad for the economy. We could use some global warming.
 Very happy to be Keynoting the NY County Republican Lincoln Day Dinner on February 12  Another record crowd!
 The  had a truly bad day--my advice is to go home, forget about it, and come back tough next year.
 Via  “ talks family and business” 
 I can't get over, after all of the buildup, what a terrible game that was-the worst Super Bowl in history. The advertisers must be furious!
 This may be the worst football game ever played by one team, Denver! Hard to watch.
 Enjoy the Super Bowl!
 Go to the website for the Judge's full decision re Trump University: 
 COURT FINDS IN FAVOR OF TRUMP UNIVERSITY 
 To Jamie Dimon—I love kicking lightweight  ass. Stop settling and fight!
 Lightweight  just got his ass kicked by Trump!
 For information on Trump University victory, call Alan Garten, Esquire, at 212.836.3203 or Jeff Goldman, Esquire, at 212.867.4466.
 Wow--tremendous victory in the Trump University case against lightweight  got the news!
 Article from The Street--The Donald's Trump Card: Himself 
 Looking forward to being hosted by  Erie County Lincoln Leadership Reception tonight. Record crowd! Can't wait.
 Raffaele Sollecito was unfairly convicted. He didn’t kill anyone. The Italian government should be ashamed. 
 Via  by mboyle1: "EXCLUSIVE - DONALD TRUMP CONFIRMED TO SPEAK AT #CPAC2014"    
 . stopped by my office to say hello- a great guy! 
 “Design your business from the start so that it is leverageable, expandable, predictable, and financeable.” – Midas Touch
 “Success breeds success. The best way to impress people is through results.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 Are Republicans suicidal? Now they want to push amnesty through Congress. Allowing Democrats into the country.
 The NY SAFE Act is an unconstitutional attack on 2nd Amendment rights. Will also increase crime.
 Obama said in his SOTU that “global warming is a fact.” Sure, about as factual as “if you like your healthcare, you can keep it.”
 Excited to announce Trump Rio de Janeiro, our first South American  hotel set to open in 2016 
 With one of the worst and most prolonged cold spells in history, with Atlanta, Texas and parts of Florida freezing- Global Warming anyone?
 Remember when "comedian" Bill Maher openly praised the disgusting terrorists who destroyed the World Trade Center-then got canned by ABC?
 Failing comedian Bill Maher, who I got an accidental glimpse of the other night, is really a dumb guy, just look at his past!
 Press conference at the opening of the  Villa at  . 
 With  and  at the opening of the  Villa at  
 “Patriotism is supporting your country all the time, and your government when it deserves it.” - Mark Twain
 Once ObamaCare is fully enacted in NY, conveniently after 2014, expect higher premiums, bigger deductibles, & worse care. Job killer!
 Wow, honored to just pass 2.5M followers on  Thanks to all my followers. We are going to have a great year together.
 Just received a wonderful letter from a new father who bought his son his first book, The Art of the Deal. Great parent!
 “The cheapest natural gas in the world is in the United States.” - 
 Always leave your ego at the door during negotiations. Remember, it’s only business and there will always be another day!
 Now the UN is attacking  franchise  With all the world's problems, is this really a top priority?
 Welcome to the new reality! Moody’s just downgraded the entire US health insurance industry because of ObamaCare.
 Via  by  "Trump to Add Rio Hotel as Part of Expansion to 30 Sites" 
 Thanks to everyone for your support on  “Top Leaders, Icons and Rebels” vv   Thanks for voting Trump!
 The  returns to  on March 6th  Watch top golfers of the world battle the Blue Monster!
 It was great being on  in the Morning (ESPN)—two great guys, fantastic show!
 Mike & Mike in one minute!
 I will be on the Mike & Mike Show on radio and ESPN-at about 6 to 7 A.M. We will be talking Super Bowl and sports-no Obama Care!
 Give me clean, beautiful and healthy air - not the same old climate change (global warming) bullshit! I am tired of hearing this nonsense.
 The weather has been so cold for so long that the global warming HOAXSTERS were forced to change the name to climate change to keep $ flow!
 Snowing in Texas and Louisiana, record setting freezing temperatures throughout the country and beyond. Global warming is an expensive hoax!
 Creativity and control can go hand in hand. Brainpower is the ultimate leverage.
 How much is New York State spending on that obnoxious T.V. commercial that is being played endlessly for a tax incentive that doesn't work?
 Steve Jobs is spinning in his grave - Apple has lost both vision and momentum - must move fast to get magic back!
 I predicted Apple's stock fall based on their dumb refusal to give the option of a larger  iPhone screen like Samsung. I sold my Apple stock
 Apple's iPhone sales fell way short-they must go to a larger screen, as alternative, fast (as I said long ago)! Samsung's size much better.
 Everything comes to him who hustles while he waits. -- Thomas A. Edison
 For entrepreneurs, ignorance is not bliss. It's fatal. It's costly. And it's for losers. You either get organized, or get crushed.
 Passion gives great momentum and can be the catalyst for great achievement.
 Give your goals substance. Imbue them with a value that exceeds the monetary. Make them count on as many levels as you can.
 Afghanistan's so called leader, Karzai, is toying with the U.S.
 Will be on Fox & Friends at 7.00 -  Enjoy!
 Do you really believe our once great country can continue to survive with incompetent leadership. The answer is no and we better move fast!
 Any and all weather events are used by the GLOBAL WARMING HOAXSTERS to justify higher taxes to save our planet! They don't believe it $$$$!
 NBC News just called it the great freeze - coldest weather in years. Is our country still spending money on the GLOBAL WARMING HOAX?
 Have the right mindset for the job. See your work as an art form--which means paying attention to every detail.
 When times are difficult, you must be even more focused. That’s when you will find profitable opportunities.
 via WSJ. Wake up  before you destroy Scotland.    
 For all of those who have been asking, a big cast announcement coming soon for 
 90 stories over midtown New York, Trump World Tower’s glass curtain wall is a true landmark 
 Great day yesterday at   unveiling the new Gary Player Villa  Gary is a champion and a great guy.
 Honored to be named as one of business’s “Top Leaders, Icons and Rebels” by   Vote Trump!
 Great   piece by  on my visit to  for  &  Politics & Eggs 
 Will be leaving Palm Beach for the 11 A.M. ceremony opening the magnificent GARY PLAYER VILLA at Trump Nationak Doral, Miami. GARY IS GREAT!
 Set high standards and meet them. The proof is in the doing: learn by doing and taking risks.
 Happy Anniversary to my wonderful wife  -- a truly great decision by me! 
 Learning to expect problems saved me from a lot of wasted energy. Winners see problems as just another way to prove themselves.
 “You're never a loser until you quit trying.” - Mike Ditka
 Hope & Change! China now controls a record number of our debt 
 Excited for tomorrow’s Politics & Eggs  co-hosted by  &  Live stream here 
 People often ask me the secret to my success, and the answer is simple: passion, focus and hard work. Momentum keeps it all going.
 WWII vs. Now! During the 3 1/2 years of World War II that started with the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor (cont) 
 Movie producer Harvey Weinstein, who lost his company to Colony Capital, is against guns but makes movies w/ major gun violence--really!
 Fox & Friends at 7.00
 To be really successful it is always good to have A COOL HEAD, WARM HEART AND BEAUTIFUL COMMON TOUCH!
 Rising over Bay Street,  brings opulent luxury along with our famous world-class amenities to the Queen City 
 Wow, just heard that that next Tuesday’s  Politics & Eggs is the largest crowd ever. Looking forward to making new friends.
  and  who I like, are intent on another New York State suicide mission. They've got to get their act together!
 To get momentum, you must first focus on a specific goal with passion and intensity.
 Trust your instincts. They are there for a reason. Without instincts, you'll have a hard time getting to--and staying at--the top.
 “Talent wins games, but teamwork and intelligence wins championships.” - Michael Jordan
  leader Ed Cox’s record is abysmal--no victories. Hopefully he can turn things around.
 Senate concludes “Benghazi could have been prevented” 
  continues to push the limits on political and investigative reporting! Andrew’s legacy lives on.
 Looking forward to being hosted by  for Politics & Eggs next Tuesday. See you in Manchester! #NHPolitics
 Great article by  Jeffrey Lord: “The Reagan Revolution. And now… the  Revolution?” 
 Lightweight  is fighting with  –Cuomo wins that one easily. Schneiderman is a total loser.
 Terrible story on front page of NYTimes about lightweight   Does Eric wear eyeliner?
 Hope you enjoy the story in the highly respected Real Estate Weekly 
 To be a winner, think like a winner. Practice positive thinking--with reality checks.
 Department of Homeland Security has spent $3.5 billion dollars building their new headquarters and is years late and billions over budget!
 I hope we never find life on another planet because if we do there's no doubt that the United States will start sending them money!
    Thanks Ted, see you at the show!
 I would like to thank a great writer and person,  of REAL ESTATE WEEKLY, for the wonderful story on me. Very much appreciated!
 “Winning takes talent, to repeat takes character.” - John Wooden
 Where is the progress in the state of New York over the last three years? There is none--only backwards.
 The Senate should immediately vote on the Iranian sanctions bill. What is the delay? Iran is already breaking its agreement with Obama
 Gabriel Sherman’s book on Roger Ailes is filled with falsehoods and inaccuracies. Publisher should be ashamed (and sued).
 A-Rod’s lawsuit trying to overturn a binding arbitration agreement is going nowhere. He should be banned from spring training.
  The Ed Cox letter to Republicans, which is being so badly ridiculed by the press, should never have been written. WEAKNESS-SAD!
 Watching Gates on  - looks like he got hit by a truck! Why didn't Obama get him, and others,to sign a confidentiality agreement?
   New York Republicans must change from a culture of losing to a culture of winning - and fast. This is your last decent shot!
 Think positively. Zap negativity immediately. Focus on the solution, not the problem. Be persistent and alert--every single day. Momentum!
 For great success, you need passion, but make sure it's well directed. Learn everything you can about what you're doing. Be an expert.
 #1 for success: Find out what you love to do. Trust yourself enough to find out what is best for you and what you're best at doing...
 Resilience is part of the survival of the fittest formula--make sure you remain adaptable.
  long time admirer.  Want to buy one of your books for a friend.  Any suggestions?"  The Art of the Deal is a good start.
 Yankees should have dropped A-Rod long ago, not even bothered with arbitration. They would have saved a fortune!
 Best speech in #GoldenGlobes history- 
 Focus on your goals, not on fixed patterns. Do what's necessary and what's unnecessary will be made clear.
 Understand that difficulties, mistakes & setbacks are an inevitable part of business and life. Don't allow them to knock you off your feet.
 Anticipate change and embrace it. Recognize new developments that you can capitalize on and use to open new doors.
  No, we need a great businessman.
  I consider myself too perfect and have no faults.
 Will be doing Fox & Friends in a few minutes - hope you enjoy!
 After watching all about the horror story that is A-Rod, I realized again that it is time to let Pete Rose into the Baseball Hall of Fame!
   They are all afraid to use it because they know what will happen - thanks!
 The Republican Party of New York has been conditioned to lose, and there is no excuse for this. Leadership must move fast and decisively!
 I will be doing Fox & Friends tomorrow morning at 7.00. Will be discussing all sorts of current disasters!
 Whether you like Obama or not, Bob Gates turned out to be one disloyal dude! Personally, I hate rats.
 In politics, and sometimes in life, FRIENDS COME AND GO, BUT ENEMIES ACCUMULATE!
 Now that the ObamaCare website contractor has been terminated for obvious incompetence, is the person who hired them going to be fired?
 President Obama just fired the ObamaCare website builder. My question is, why were they hired in the first place? Sue them for damages!
 The brand new Blue Monster just opened at Trump National Doral - Miami. Also, great new driving range which is open 'till midnight. GO SEE!
 Focus on your goals, not your problems. Problems are a mind exercise--learn to play beyond your comfort zone.
 Be tough, be smart, be personable, but don't take things personally. That's good business.
 It’s Thursday. How many people have lost their healthcare today?
 #TBT With Darrell Hammond when I hosted SNL. 
 The Trump Organization continues to expand internationally at a record pace. Many new announcements to come soon.
 One of the world's tallest buildings,  is not only a 5 star hotel but has 5 star dining options 
 Via  “Donald Trump Plans Huge Towers In Rio For Post-Olympic Building Boom” 
 Thanks everybody for the Happy Birthday greetings, but it’s actually the 10th birthday of The Apprentice. My birthday is June 14th....
 “Offshore wind is a dead duck in Scotland and it’s time Alex Salmond manned up, stopped blaming Westminster (cont) 
 The news about our beautiful Miss Venezuela, Monica Spear, is devastating to all who knew her. A spectacular woman, she will be missed.
   One of the all-time greats - a true spiritual leader and wonderful person. Keep up the good fight!
 We had a GREAT year  with ties, shirts and suits, thanks!  New selections just arrived - they are amazing!
 Tomorrow is the 10 year anniversary of the Apprentice, one of the biggest hits in television history. How time flies!
 Why didn’t Gates resign if he was so unhappy about what he was being told by Obama? The fact is, Iraq etc. have always been disasters!
 While I am a critic of President Obama, I hate it when someone (Robert Gates) writes a self serving negative book about his boss.
 Please,  go back to your original menu and preparation. Believe me, it was much better. Let me know when the change is made!
 Identify your goals. Know precisely what you want to achieve, study the best people in your field,and then plan the best route for success.
 Remember to think big by expanding your horizons at the same time you're expanding your net worth.
 Achievers move forward at all times. Don't tread water. Get out there and go for it.
 Congratulations to  on his five year anniversary as the anchor  Brett is great!
 Looking forward to hosting the  “House Majority 2014 Golf Tournament” at Trump Int'l West Palm Beach on Jan. 27th.
 We are experiencing the coldest weather in more than two decades-most people never remember anything like this. GLOBAL WARMING anyone?
 Have your own vision & stick with it. Don't be afraid to be unique.Every day is an opportunity to show what you can do at the highest level.
 Entrepreneurs: Set the example and you'll be a magnet for the right people. Great leaders determine the teams they assemble.
 Sec of State Kerry said we would not go back to Iraq. We shouldn’t, but he should not have said that. So stupid!
 Another one of my predictions just came true-- Iraq is a total disaster with government losing all control—so sad.
 Via  by  “Trump To Visit New Hampshire” 
 Just hit a million on Facebook- 
 Most of the world's great riders are at Mar-a-Lago today for the Trump Invitational, one of the most important equestrian events of the year
 “The future is always beginning now.” -  Mark Strand, former Poet Laureate
 Record snowfall & freezing temps throughout the country. Where is Global Warming when you need it?!
 Welcome to the new ObamaCare reality – Doctor spent 2 hours on hold w/insurance company to get approval for surgery 
  is the top public course in the country with magnificent Pacific Ocean views 
  has great campaigns. Support one today 
 Via  by Peter Millard: "Trump Helps Rio Builders After Olympics: Corporate Brazil" 
 Try to develop a tempo when you're working--momentum is something you have to work at to maintain, & is an important element of success.
 A regular part of your day should be devoted to expanding your horizons. Learning is a new beginning.
 I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by conscious endeavor. --Henry David Thoreau
 “Invincibility lies in the defence; the possibility of victory in the attack.” - Sun Tzu
 Snowden should come back to America and face justice. Instead, he is begging for clemency from Moscow. Treat him as a spy.
 It's Jan. 2. President Obama should end his vacation early & get back to Washington to straighten out the ObamaCare catastrophe--or end it.
 Entrepreneurs are visionaries in some respects--they look beyond the present. Keep that in mind when looking for opportunities.
 The only Forbes 5 Star & 5 Diamond hotel with a 5 Star & 5 Diamond restaurant  offers elite luxury 
 This very expensive GLOBAL WARMING bullshit has got to stop. Our planet is freezing, record low temps,and our GW scientists are stuck in ice
 Today is the first day of the rest of your life - make the most of it!
 Have a happy, successful and healthy New Year!
 When it comes to money, finance and even life, PROTECT THE DOWNSIDE AND THE UPSIDE WILL TAKE CARE OF ITSELF!
 Make sure to have fun and celebrate NYE with friends and family. Happy New Year everyone!
 “Tomorrow is the first blank page of a 365-page book. Write a good one.” — 
 Bring in 2014    NYE soireé -- NYC's most exclusive New Year's Eve Party w/SoHi &  
 Spend your last day of 2013 contemplating the moves you will make in 2014 to make it your best year ever!
 The con artists changed the name from GLOBAL WARMING to CLIMATE CHANGE when GLOBAL WARMING was no longer working and credibility was lost!
 What the hell is going on with GLOBAL WARMING. The planet is freezing, the ice is building and the G.W. scientists are stuck-a total con job
 Entrepreneurs – be tough, resolute & trustworthy. The most crucial time to build your reputation is when you start making deals.
 “No one remembers who came in second.” -  Walter Hagen
 “The more predictable the business, the more valuable it is. Predictability also means consistency of brand experience.” - Midas Touch
 Bring in the New Year with style in Las Vegas.  is the place to be.
 Congratulations to  and  on yesterday's very exciting game.
 Cover your bases--know everything you can about what you're doing. Keep your focus by being well informed on a daily basis.
 Ask yourself, "Is this a blip or is it a catastrophe?" and your equilibrium will be kept in check if/when hard times hit.
 Be tough, be focused. There are a lot of ups and downs, but you can ride them out if you're prepared for them.
 Temperature at record lows in many parts of the country. 50 degrees below zero with wind chill in large area. Global warming folks iced in!
 In the upcoming New Year we will focus like never before - if we do that we will have complete and total VICTORY in all we do!
 We're coming up on the NEW YEAR-It is really important that, despite so many stupid decisions being made in Washington, we make it BEST EVER
 The global warming  scientists don't want to be airlifted off the ship-they are having too much fun and that is too simple a solution-FAME!
 We should be focused on clean and beautiful air-not expensive and business closing GLOBAL WARMING-a total hoax!
 The rescue icebreaker, trying to free the ship of the GLOBAL WARMING scientists, has turned back-the ice is  massive (a record). IRONIC!
 Will be working with contractors at Trump National Doral in Miami today.
   As a major fan of Nelson Mandela and the people of South Africa, all of my statements are made with love. Protect his legacy now
 Via   "Mar-a-Lago to host top equestrian jumpers: Trump Invitational will benefit 90 area charities." 
 It is really too bad that the scientists studying GLOBAL WARMING in Antarctica got stuck on their icebreaker because of massive ice and cold
 #TBT With Barbara Walters on my helicopter going somewhere. 
 Thank you to  & Jeffrey Lord for the lovely article “Governor Trump? The conservative Nelson Rockefeller.” 
 Celebrating New Year's Eve in the Windy City? Join  for the chic & elegant Cirque Soiree Celebration 
 O.K., Christmas is over, now we can all go back to the wars of life. Focus, focus, focus-never accept defeat -push hard for total victory!
 I hope everybody is having a FANTASTIC Christmas! No matter how tough things may seem remember that you will ride it out & go on to victory!
 The new Pope is a humble man, very much like me, which probably explains why I like him so much!
 Merry Christmas, have an amazing day!
 Without passion you don't have energy, and without energy, you don't have anything!
 “Push yourself again and again. Don't give an inch until the final buzzer sounds.” - Larry Bird
 I could fix existing Tappan Zee Bridge for peanuts. Unfortunately, Gov Cuomo will end up spending more than $10B on this project. $25 tolls?
 I'd like to wish all of my friends--and even my many enemies--a very Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.
 Entrepreneurs: Put everything you've got into what you're doing. Be totally focused--nothing should be haphazard.
 Entrepreneurs: Whatever happens, you're responsible. If it doesn't happen, you're responsible.
 Entrepreneurs: Apply your skills and talent, but above all, be tenacious. See yourself as victorious--which means never giving up.
 ALWAYS TRY TO LEARN FROM OTHER PEOPLES MISTAKES, NOT YOUR OWN - IT IS MUCH CHEAPER THAT WAY!
 SOMETIMES YOUR BEST INVESTMENTS ARE THE ONES YOU DON'T MAKE!
 Did you ever not do something that had you done it would have turned out to be a disaster. Never look back, just learn from your experience!
 Realize that being an entrepreneur is not a group effort. You're in charge--everything starts with you.
 Entrepreneurs: Be ready for problems--you'll have them every day. Keep open to new ideas--that's where innovation begins.
  Find work that you love--you have to be passionate about it to succeed. Then focus and never give up!
 #3.  Look at the solution, not the problem. Learn to focus on what will give results.
 #2.  Keep your momentum. Without momentum, a lot of great ideas go nowhere.
 #1. Keep the big picture in mind. There are always opportunities and possibilities, and thinking too small can negate a lot of them.
 Will be on Fox & Friends tomorrow morning at 7.00 - hope you enjoy!
 #HasJustineLandedYet- Justine, what the hell are you doing, are you crazy? Not nice or fair! I will support  Justine is FIRED!
   GREAT interview with Tim McCarver! Have a fantastic Christmas and New Year.
 The Herschel Walker interview on The Tim McCarver Show was  fantastic-much can be learned from watching. Congrats to Herschel and Tim!
 With the very dangerous carjacking epidemic going on, especially in New York and New Jersey, you would be lucky to have a gun for protection
 I am going to Trump National Doral in Miami today to check out the brand new and just opened BLUE MONSTER and the spectacular driving range.
 It was 25 years ago today that Pan Am flight 103 was downed by a terrorist killing 270 innocent people.  released the terrorist!
 Remember, THE HARDER YOU WORK, THE LUCKIER YOU GET!
 Fernando, thank you for the GREAT review of The Blue Monster in South Florida Golf-especially top 10 in the WORLD. I love 
 I had a lot of fun answering your questions in the latest round of #AskTheDonald. See if your question made it- 
 If you don't believe in yourself, no one else will.
 Personally, I think Douglas Durst's brother got screwed by Douglas--no wonder he's angry.
 . Why is Douglas Durst allowed to use the Freedom Tower to get out of a lease with Conde Nast?
 . a highly overrated architect, has had many problems with buildings he has designed.
 Secret Service members on break from Obama’s $4M vacation are more than welcomed to relax at Hawaii’s top hotel 
 Lightweight  is pushing for the Moreland Commission to be disbanded immediately--because he is being looked at!
 Guess what, folks--the ObamaCare website just went down again. What a disaster.
 If you can’t adapt to new situations then you will never be successful. Every change is a new opportunity to use your talent.
 “Every strike brings me closer to the next home run.” - Babe Ruth
 What's with this rap stuff with me and Ebenezer Scrooge? 
 It’s Friday. How many people have been forced off their plans and lost their doctors today because of ObamaCare?
 Trump National Hudson Valley's 7,693 yd, par 72 course features one of the country's great golf courses. 
 Packed with holiday celebrations, members & staff are enjoying the first Christmas season at  
 Rated Toronto's #1 hotel,  has 261 guest rooms & suites furnished in elegant, cosmopolitan style. 
 White House relaxes penalty for canceled health policies, a major blow  to the sustainability (and concept) of ObamaCare! They are desperate
 If you fail once, twice, three times, it doesn't matter. Learn from your mistakes and push forward to VICTORY-the sweetest feeling there is!
 “Build up your weaknesses until they become your strong points.” - Knute Rockne
 ObamaCare Horror Story: “Navigators Tell Applicants To Lie Like Administration”    strikes again!
 Can’t fool Americans. 57% of uninsured hate ObamaCare  Reality is less will be insured b/c of this monstrosity.
 Young Entrepreneurs – the Holiday season is here but that is no excuse not to stay on top of your business prospects. Focus!
 A really nice article about the Blue Monster from “The Street.” 
 Every day Pastor Saeed is imprisoned by Iran is an indictment on Obama’s ‘diplomacy.’ #SaveSaeed
 Pres. Obama is about to embark on a 17 day vacation in his ‘native’ Hawaii, putting Secret Service away from families on Christmas. Aloha!
 No cuts to welfare, no cuts to food stamps & NOT A SINGLE CUT TO OBAMACARE, yet the new budget cuts military benefits. Sad!
 #TBT Taking piano lessons from my friend Elton John. 
 I am so honored by all the great NY State Repubs who came to my office, called & wrote for me to run for Governor. If I do, I will win.
 New York Republican leader  is pushing my friend  into political suicide. Results won’t be pleasant!
 Enough about my ties etc.  but they are doing really big numbers - people love them (and  loves Trump)!
 I like Rob Astorino. He's a friend and really good guy. Sadly, he has ZERO chance of beating Cuomo and the 2 to 1 Dems for governor!
 Go to Macy's today and buy Trump ties, shirts, suits and cufflinks as a Christmas or holiday present.Great style, great price! ONLY THE BEST
 The coolest story is that John Beale, the man who headed up CLIMATE CHANGE for the government, is a proven con man and total phoney.ARRESTED
 The more time you spend feeling sorry for yourself, the more time you waste after a setback. Move on and quickly embrace the next challenge!
 I just left the Trump Tower atrium--it is packed with great people. #1 tourist attraction in NYC-- Fun!  #TrumpTower
 For all of those that think life is easy & don’t want to work, remember: HOPE IS THE POOR MAN’S BREAD.
 Alternatives are important but first Repubs must repeal ObamaCare. It's an unsustainable monstrosity that's destroying our healthcare.
 The Trump Signature Collection is the best menswear design for young entrepreneurs. Great style & design exclusively available 
 “If you want the best, you’d better be the best – in all aspects of business.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 “You can attack, defend, counterattack, sell or ignore. ”-Roger Ailes to Pres. Reagan during prep for 2nd Mondale debate/ '84 election
 I have never met a successful person that was a quitter. Successful people never, ever, give up!
   Regis, you are the GREATEST!
 FRACK NOW & FRACK FAST!!! American prosperity depends on it. Our economic renaissance is here.
 Benghazi is now a full blown training center for jihadists  Congratulations to the Obama administration.
  "Best  of 2013":  Donald Trump at  
 ObamaCare Story of the Day: “Florida Cancer Patient Loses Insurance During Treatment B/C of ObamaCare” 
 2013 is the worst year ever for Hollywood. Garbage released after garbage. What is going on in these studios?!
 “Big jobs usually go to the men who prove their ability to outgrow small ones.” - Theodore Roosevelt
 Via Miami Herald “Blue Monster comes back to life at Doral” 
 #AskTheDonald- Head over to my  page to have me answer your questions in video- 
 Unsustainable. With our $17T debt & $90T in unfunded liabilities, government “blatantly” wasted $30B this year 
  beautiful MacLeod House & Lodge offers luxurious accommodations & dining w/ sea views 
 When  defended Obama on Benghazi in the presidential debate, she was defending a complete lie 
 Congrats to Pres.Obama on having 3 of  “biggest Pinocchios of the year”   Great accomplishment!
 No better place to celebrate New Year’s Eve than  the most elite hotel in downtown NYC 
 Prime Minister  is very foolish in giving  so much money to build wind turbines which r destroying Scotland.
 Under President Obama, do you think America will become a THIRD WORLD COUNTRY?
 Who thinks that President Obama is totally incompetent?
   Good luck on your real estate test - you will be the biggest star of all!
 Wow, a really great review of my golf club in Scotland,  in todaysgolferco.uk. Thank you! 
 “Get to the essence immediately. Learn to economize. People appreciate brevity in today’s world.” – Think Like a Champion
 Wow, just in-John Beale, the top person in government on climate change (EPA), is a total fraud, and just admitted it! What can they say now
 We should be focusing on beautiful, clean air & not on wasteful & very expensive GLOBAL WARMING bullshit! China & others are hurting our air
 They call it "climate change" now because the words "global warming" didn't work anymore. Same people fighting hard to keep it all going!
 59% of the United States, by area, is now covered in snow-highest % in many years. The "global warming" name isn't working anymore-SORRY!
 Wow, it's snowing in Isreal and on the pyramids in Egypt. Are we still wasting billions on the global warming con? MAKE U.S. COMPETITIVE!
 President Obama and other world leaders don't know how close they were to being seriously injured (or worse) standing next to psycho in  SA.
 The United States is experiencing the coldest weather in decades with vast amounts of snow blanketing many states.Pendulum has swung to cool
   The Donald J. Trump signature line of shirts, ties, really beautiful suits and cufflinks is the best Christmas & holiday gift by far
 Have a GREAT weekend everybody - enjoy yourself but always keep your goals and aspirations in mind. Never lose sight of the victory ahead!
   I love to see garbage properly disposed of which is why I like watching the dismal circulation numbers of Vanity Fair-IT'S DEAD
 I really like Nelson Mandela but South Africa is a crime ridden mess that is just waiting to explode-not a good situation for the people!
 “Is business success a natural talent? I think it’s a combination of aptitude, work and luck.” – Think Like a Champion
 The evidence continues to mount against lightweight   It is time for JCOPE and Moreland Commissions to act.
  #LieOfTheYear is Obama’s if you like your health care plan, you can keep it. Wrong. It’s the lie of the decade.
 Via  “Please Pray for Me… I Am Losing My Insurance”    Just one of the millions of cases like this...
 Now Sebelius is “'urging' insurers to cover people who haven't paid”   Complete mess. Enrollment Numbers are a sham.
 The ill-conceived windfarm that  is pushing for Aberdeen will lose $50 million a year. Only a fool would build it or want it!
 If Graydon Carter's very dumb bosses would fire him for his terrible circulation numbers at failing Vanity Fair-his bad food restaurants die
 Bird killing windfarm that I oppose in Aberdeen got delayed by at least two years. forced the failing developers to delay!
 The talk in Albany is that JCOPE & Moreland Commissions are taking my complaint against lightweight (cont) 
 Sources inside  office are saying that they are very concerned with the allegations against their lightweight boss.
 My complaint against  is a “case study” for JCOPE & Moreland Commissions on everything that is wrong with NYS politics.
 Economics behind ugly, bird killing wind turbines do not work--will destroy Scotland's beautiful coastline. (cont) 
 Can you believe that the corrupt and pathetic South Africa police force has yet to arrest the sign language guy. Such danger-give 10 years!
 What a sad thing that the  memory of Nelson Mandela will be stained by the phoney sign language moron who is in every picture at funeral!
 How amazing, the State Health Director who verified copies of Obama’s “birth certificate” died in plane crash today. All others lived
 I hope you all are looking at the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection of ties, shirts & cufflinks  for Christmas & holidays.
 Exciting news—After massive construction, the Blue Monster at Trump National Doral is open for business today. 
 A $1.5B website that can only handle 50K users at a time is sad but no surprise!
 Our prayers are with Rev.  for a speedy recovery. His faith continues to inspire us all.
 Via  by   "Trump Weighs In on Saeed: Obama 'Didn’t Even Ask'"  Thanks Bristol!
 Had dinner last night at Megu, 845 United Nations Plaza--fabulous food, beautiful restaurant.
 Via  " to Testify at New Congressional Hearing on Persecution of Pastor Saeed Abedini" 
 Via  by  TRUMP BLASTS OBAMA FOR FAILING TO SECURE CHRISTIAN PASTOR’S FREEDOM IN IRAN” 
 This is one of the COLDEST WINTERS ever, freezing all over the country for long periods of time! So much for GLOBAL WARMING.
 I will be on Piers Morgan Live tonight at 9 p.m. on CNN. Tune in!
 The atrium of  dressed up for Christmas- 
        Happy Birthday Sarina.
 Let Pete into the Hall of Fame-  
 Why does Conde Nast allow dopey Graydon Carter to run bad food restaurants while running failing  magazine?
 President Obama's approval rating, at 38%, is at an all-time low. Gee, I wonder why?
   The brand new Blue Monster at Trump National Doral has recieved GREAT reviews from the golf critics. Check it out-opens Dec. 14
   The Blue Monster at Trump National Doral opens for play on Saturday morning after a massive rebuilding - brand new course!
 It's amazing how badly the Knicks and Nets are playing. Everybody predicted they would be top teams with all of the money spent. Too bad!
 Via  "Pastor Saeed's Wife Expresses Gratitude to Donald Trump for Raising Her Husband's Plight" 
 Re Kerry admitting to “working” for Pastor Abedini’s release--why has US already released Iranian spies & nuclear scientist? Dumb!
 . claims he has "never stopped working” f/Pastor Abedini’s release through “back channels."  Where are the results?
 After climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are many more hills to climb. -- Nelson Mandela
 A beautiful view from my office today- 
 “Know from the inside out that you have the power to succeed and you will.” – Think Like a Champion
 . and John Heilemann’s  book, Double Down, is an excellent read on the just passed election. Great book, congrats! 
 Come on MLB, do the right thing! Let  into the Hall.  No drugs—just hard work and talent!
 Great meeting with  the wonderful wife of Christian Pastor Saeed, who is in Iranian prison. #savesaeed 
 How can NYS allow lightweight  to remain in office? What are JCOPE & Moreland Commissions waiting on? 
 Illegal use of official Attorney General stationary by lightweight  
 Via  by  “Trump: Obama blew chance to free U.S. pastor” 
 Iran must immediately allow Christian #PastorSaeed out of prison or we should put back sanctions (which should never have been lifted)
 Naghmeh Abedini, the lovely wife of the Christian Pastor Saeed being held in an Iranian jail, just left my office. #savesaeed
 State Senator Shirley Huntley "ratted" on black politicians & was believed--when she ratted on  nobody listened. Racism!
 Major League Baseball: The best thing you can do is let  all time hits leader---into the Hall of Fame. It's time!
 If Graydon Carter's very dumb bosses would fire him for his terrible circulation numbers at failing Vanity Fair-his bad food restaurants die
 The ill-conceived windfarm that  is pushing for Aberdeen will lose $50 million a year. Only a fool would build it or want it!
 Bird killing windfarm that I oppose in Aberdeen just got delayed by at least two years. forced the failing developers to delay!
 ICYMI via  by Jeffrey Lord: “THE MALVERSATION OF  - Trump hits NY AG with ethics charge.” 
 WH claims it lied about Pres. Obama living with his uncle b/c “wasn’t mentioned in his book.” I guess Bill Ayers never knew about it!
 Where’s the leadership? Obama only met with Sebelius ONCE since ObamaCare passed   His signature legislation...
 Graydon Carter, whose reign over failing  has been a disaster, has acted in two movies--both bombed & got bad reviews.
 It’s time for  to enter   All time hits leader has paid the price.
 Congrats to   & Bobby Cox on all being unanimously elected to   Great leaders & managers.
 As always & due to popular demand, will be open  Christmas eve & day as well as New Year's eve & day 
 “Courageous people do not fear forgiving, for the sake of peace.” – Nelson Mandela
 Via  "Scottish wind farm opposed by Donald Trump delayed" 
 Just read  book “Shooting Straight” and whether you love him or hate him (I’m in the first category), it is terrific.
 Just left Florida, amazing how well State is doing-- jobs way up, taxes down. Congrats to 
 Dopey Graydon Carter, who is presiding over dying  magazine, is also presiding over dying Waverly Inn—worst food in city.
 I really enjoy doing  every Monday at 7 AM.    and  are great people.
 The Unaffordable Care Act, sometimes referred to as ObamaCare, is not working. Millions of people are losing their plans and doctors-fraud!
 Obama said he never met his uncle, Oscar, who was arrested for whatever. Turns out he lived with his uncle in Boston. SO MANY LIES!
    Wow, I just looked at the circulation numbers - Vanity Fair Magazine won't be around much longer, it's really in bad shape!
 Just got back to New York from California. Will be on Fox  & Friends tomorrow morning at 7.00. ObamaCare and other disasters to be discussed
 P.S. - There is also something really good to say about humility. Being confident and humble is a great combination, maybe the best of all!
 People are always asking me about the very special word, CONFIDENCE. The fact is there is (almost) nothing like it. Is derived from winning!
 Show me someone without an ego, and I'll show you a loser - having a healthy ego, or high opinion of yourself, is a real positive in life!
    Word is that the dinner tonight at Mar-a-Lago, hosted by the incomparable Lois Pope, was fabulous. Big money raised for charity
 In making big money, knowledge is far more important than any other ingredient, including money itself!
 My father Fred Trump left me a relatively small amount of money (compared to where I am today-over $10 billion) but vast amount of knowledge
 Don't underestimate yourself--or your possibilities. There are always opportunities.
 “After every setback, start thinking big as soon as possible.” - Think Big
   Thanks.
 My shirts, ties & cufflinks  have never been better or more beautiful. Great holiday gifts, great price.
 “You can't put a limit on anything. The more you dream, the farther you get.” -  
 It's Friday. How much money has been wasted on defunct ObamaCare website today?
 The now $1.2B ObamaCare website is as bad as ever-- insurers not getting the proper data. 
 Looking forward to hosting  next week  The White House has  abandoned her husband, Christian Pastor Abedini.
 Iran has never had a better friend than Obama.
 Steps away from Waikiki's famous beaches,  is Hawaii’s top destination  w/our signature amenities 
 Trump Tower at Century City brings luxury to Makati, the financial & social capital of Philippines 
 . was a great choice for NYC Police Commissioner. He will make us proud, and safe!
  Thank you.
 We should be focused on magnificently clean and healthy air and not distracted by the expensive hoax that is global warming!
 Great going to all of Dubai in winning what will be a fantastic #Expo2020 - we will all be there!
  Thanks.
 Ice storm rolls from Texas to Tennessee - I'm in Los Angeles and it's freezing. Global warming is a total, and very expensive, hoax!
 It always seems impossible until it is done. --Nelson Mandela
 A good head and a good heart are always a formidable combination. -- Nelson Mandela
 Nelson Mandela and myself had a wonderful relationship--he was a special man and will be missed. 
 Leaving today for California to inspect my fantastic golf course & club on the Palos Verdes peninsula. Big success. 
 U.S. criticized for releasing Iranian nuclear scientist while striking no deal for Christian pastor 
 Why is it that when Warren Buffett uses the bankruptcy laws to his benefit, nobody cares, but with me they go nuts!
 Off shore windfarms being abandoned in droves throughout world—too expensive to build & operate—don’t work. (cont) 
 . wants out of their Aberdeen windfarm fiasco so badly but  won’t let them—he’s (cont) 
 . couldn’t sell its money losing Aberdeen windfarm—so  forced phony extension.  
 The problem w/ the concept of "global warming" is that the U.S. is spending a fortune on "fixing it" while China & others do nothing!
 Wow, record setting cold temperatures throughout large parts of the country. Must be global warming, I mean climate change!
 Our billion dollar website- 
 A special message for Martin Bashir- 
 Congrats to  for firing Martin Bashir—don’t feel badly, he didn’t get ratings anyway. 
 Sleazebag  has just been forced to resign from  His pathetic apology wasn’t enough to save his job.  
 Denver, Minnesota and others are bracing for some of the coldest weather on record. What are the global warming geniuses saying about this?
 “The road to Easy Street goes through the sewer.” – John Madden
 There are no short cuts to any place worth going.-- Beverly Sills
 New reality. Yuan just passed the Euro as 2nd most traded finance currency   Our leaders better get smart fast.
 Wow, it’s now official. ObamaCare website has topped $1B  Will soon be up to $1.5B
   Thanks.
  Yes, it will happen.
  Great!
  Happy Birthday
  four restaurants provide guests with a wide range of choices, each embodying excellence 
  Grand Deluxe Suites = Chicago’s most spacious hotel rooms, each w/ 10 ft floor to ceiling windows 
   Thank you.
   Thanks.
  Thank you.
  Great!
  You have to have passion for your work. That's most important. Then keep your focus intact. Good luck.
 You can only smile when the losers of the world try so hard to put down successful people. Just remember, they all want to be YOU!
 With few exceptions, only really smart people are able to make a lot of money. Hard work is also important, but "brains" will supersede.
 I just filed a major ethics complaint against crooked New York State Attorney General Eric Schneiderman-he should resign from office!
 Too bad about New York Magazine, but there's a much bigger one out there, currently doing a story on me to get even, that I'll soon discuss!
 Remember I predicted that New York Magazine would  fold and people scoffed? Just announced (N.Y.Post) it lost big $'s & is cutting way back!
    Thanks Steve!
 “If you don't have time to do it right, when will you have time to do it over?” - John Wooden
 Here we go again via   ... another bad deal.
   Thanks.
  Thank you.
  Have fun, enjoy NYC.
 “Build your reputation on intelligence, responsibility, and results. That’s building the right way.” – Think Like a Champion
 Congratulations to the White House. For every 1 ObamaCare enrollment there are 44 cancellation notices. Very unfair!
 Dying  just named me to a list. Too bad GQ is no longer relevant—won’t be around long!
 Many great business campaigns at   Great way to support small upstarts.
 Trump Int. Hotel & Tower Vancouver will transform the skyline w/ its 616 ft twisting & beautiful  tower 
 A fine man, Dr. Paul F. Crouch, has just passed away. All Christians are grateful for his wonderful life and work. 
  Thank you.
 The least number of hurricanes in the U.S. in decades. So they change global warming (too cold) to climate change-now what will they call it
 That was a great football game.
   AJ is a GREAT quarterback who is finally being recognized as such - a total winner. What a pass!
 Wow, the ObamaCare website, which President Obama said would be working TODAY, is a total mess with many functions not even thought about!
 Just left $259 million rebuilding of Doral in Miami. Amazing - Trump National Doral will be a masterpiece (if I do say so myself)!
 I hope you buy my shirts and ties at 
 Today is the day that ObamaCare website was supposed to be up and working. WRONG-website is closed down, a total disaster! 90 million doomed
 Offshore Wind in Europe: Lessons for the U.S.  via  The lesson should be that it's a lousy idea!!!"
 First Minister Salmond should stop his fruitless drive for obsolete wind turbines in Scotland-he would become popular again!  
 Trump International in Dubai  will be one of the great projects anywhere in the world. Congratulations to  for their genius!
 Congratulations to Dubai on winning the rights to host Expo 2020! A great place winning a major global event.  
 My ties, shirts and cufflinks have never been more beautiful-THE BEST-available at Macy's!
 Work begins on the Old Post Office in Washington D.C. in 3 months. It will soon become one of the great hotels of the world.
 I am in Miami at Trump National Doral. Just gave out contract to build a new ballroom and luxury suites. Blue Monster complete-opens Dec 14.
   RSPB IS A TOTAL JOKE-They went for  bird chopping wind turbines in  and fought me on bird friendly golf course!
  Florida Everglades project abandoned after it was determined that tens of thousands of birds would be killed by wind turbines!
   the same man that released Pan Am terrorist for humane reasons, will destroy Scotland with grotesque turbines!
  must fight to save the massive bird population which will be devastated by wind turbines in  
 HAPPY THANKSGIVING EVERYONE, ENJOY YOUR DAY!
 I truly believe that our country has the worst and dumbest negotiators of virtually any country in the world.
 Can you believe that "President" Karzai of Afghanistan is holding out for more, more, more and refuses to sign deal. Tell him to go to hell!
 Despite the fact that I have had great success with the words YOU'RE FIRED, I do not like firing people. But ZERO on ObamaCare mess-no way!
 Why doesn't President Obama simply apologize for telling a big fat lie, announce that ObamaCare was a mistake, and deal a really great plan!
 US froze $8B in Iranian assets during ’79 Hostage Crisis. Now Obama is giving it back to Iran while Christian Pastor is jailed. Don't do it!
 Happy Thanksgiving to all--even the haters and losers!
 Tell Iran to let our Christian Pastor go--and I mean right now. If they don't, there will be hell to pay.
 Make sure to enjoy your time with your family during the holiday. It is a special time. Love and appreciate your family.
 The $1B failed website is the tip of the iceberg on the ObamaCare. Over 90 million estimated will lose their plans next year.
 War on the families. Price of electricity hit record high in October   Terrible, especially during holiday season.
 Reigning  Champion  does great work with  Donate to an Injured Warrior today 
 Via  "Donald Trump in New  Video"   Emin & family are wonderful people.
 Come celebrate Thanksgiving in the Windy City at  5 Star, 5 Diamond "Sixteen" restaurant 
  Thank you and Happy Thanksgiving.
 “Learn, know, and show. It’s a proven formula. Put it to use starting today.” – Think Like a Champion
    Thank you.
    Thanks.
  Great!
 Via  "JAILED U.S. PASTOR'S WIFE PRAISES TRUMP: 'I hope more people like him will speak out'" 
    No way, they are bird killing machines.
    Thanks.
    I will check it out, thanks.
 Mr. President, tell Iran to immediately free the CHRISTIAN PASTOR, as a sign of good faith, & if they refuse break off talks--big sanctions
 President Obama said, over and over again, if you like your plan, you can keep your plan, PERIOD! This turned out to be a total lie-90 mill.
 Look at the solution, not the problem. Learn to focus on what will give results.
 Set the example. You can motivate others as well as yourself by remembering that you are setting the example.
 Look great for Thanksgiving. Trump Signature Collection, exclusively available  offers top men's styles 
 How does Obama rationalize giving Iran $8B in sanction relief when a Christian pastor is being tortured in an Iranian prison?
 Wind Power Company Fined $1 Million for Killing Birds. Golden eagles among victims...    
 We enjoy hosting tourists in  They come from all over the world to see the Atrium, a NYC landmark. 
 When do we sue the company-- for billions-- that robbed us in creating the hapless ObamaCare website?
 I can't believe no one has been fired over the ObamaCare website fiasco!
 In Vegas? Enjoy Thanksgiving in  DJT lounge where the  games will be playing all day 
 Wind Power Company Fined $1 Million for Killing Birds. Golden eagles among victims...   
 Vision remains vision until you focus, do the work, and bring it down to earth where it will do some good.
 I will be in Palm Beach, Jupiter, and Miami today checking on big construction projects. I love Florida and love on time and on budget const
 President Obama is finally getting hammered, even by his most loyal supporters and the press-I guess they can only take so much!
 New poll, WOW-53% say President Obama is not honest & trustworthy. What took them so long. Go back and look at his house purchase in Chicago
 Don't worry, THE UNITED STATES WILL BE GREAT AGAIN!
 Just got home, watching the news, and every story is bad about the U.S. Someday we will return to being great again, but we need leadership!
 “The worst thing you can possibly do in a deal is seem desperate to make it.” – The Art of The Deal.
 Why didn't Obama, as part of the negotiation, free the Christian Pastor Saeed Abedini? 
 Obama is going to take away over 90M Americans’ healthcare plans but he is letting Iran keep its nukes. Just think about that.
 Who would  you rather have negotiating with Iran--President Obama or Toronto Mayor Ford? My money is on Ford.
 Realize that being an entrepreneur is not a group effort. You're in charge. Everything starts with you.
 Don't underestimate yourself or your possibilities--keep your focus intact, and focus on the positives.
 After settling for a ridicilous 13 billion dollars, J.P.Morgan's lawyer is critical of the amount of the fine-why did they settle then-DUMB!
 Best book ever on dealmaking (or so they say) - TRUMP: THE ART OF THE DEAL.  Go get it, and others, Washington - you really can do better!
 I know it has been many years since our country made great deals, but isn't it about time we start, right now. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 The reason great dealmakers do not OPENLY celebrate a deal, especially one that is not complete, is that it shows weakness to the other side
 John Kerry is openly celebrating the tenuous nuclear deal with Iran. Great dealmakers do not celebrate deals,they just go on to the next one
 Tom Brady is a good friend of mine, a great player, a great guy and a total winner! Fantastic comeback win-this is what our country needs!
 Tom Brady has done a great job tonight-amazing New England comeback. Good game- not over yet!
 We had all the leverage in our nuclear negotiations with Iran and our leaders foolishly decided to let them out of the trap. WHY?
 How much longer are we expected to put up with the world's most incompetent     leader - ObamaCare, Iran, Syria, bads deals. JUST NEVER ENDS
 I will be on Fox & Friends tomorrow morning at 7. Will be discussing basic stupidity and incompetence, of which our "leaders" have plenty!
 I do not understand how so many of my Jewish friends backed Obama in the last election. He is a TOTAL DISASTER FOR ISRAEL-AND ALWAYS WILL BE
 How far has the United States gone down when we are reduced to accept the imbecilic deal just agreed to with Iran. Read THE ART OF THE DEAL!
 What a rotten deal we made with Iran. We get nothing (except laughter at our stupidity). They get everything, including delay and big cash!
 They changed the name global warming to climate change because the concept of global warming just wasn't working!
 The people that gave you global warming are the same people that gave you ObamaCare!
 Snow and ice, freezing weather, in Texas, Arizona and Oklahoma - what the hell is going on with GLOBAL WARMING?
 Get smart on knockout assaults and crime - we have to be slightly more vicious (and violent) than the assaulter-and crime would end FAST!
 The scum that gets high on badly hurting old ladies and others through knockout assaults wouldn't feel that way with a gun at their head!
 We are using the absolute wrong negotiating technique with respect to the Iran nuclear talks. Strengthen sanctions until GREAT deal is made!
 Young entrepreneurs – keep positive. Don’t let the ObamaCare disaster stop your endeavors. There are great opportunities out there.
  Happy Birthday!
 It’s Friday. How many millions has the White House wasted on the ObamaCare website today?
 Republicans have the right approach to ObamaCare – let it fail.  Free market solutions will be embraced by Americans in 2016.
 Such a nice article in the New York Times about a wonderful developer, Arthur Zeckendorf 
 Thomas Jefferson wrote the Senate filibuster rule. Harry Reid & Obama killed it yesterday.  Rule was in effect for over 200 years.
 Since the Democrats decided to kill the filibuster, they now own it.Republicans should keep the new rule when they're in the majority.
 Hypocrite. Watch Senator Obama defend "democratic debate' of Senate filibuster rules in 2005 
 If JP Morgan took their case through the courts for 15 years, nobody would be suing them—easy target.
 Lightweight shakedown artist AG Eric Schneiderman was exposed in today’s New York Post editorial 
 For all those sick degenerates contemplating a knockout attack, please remember the late, great Charles Bronson-no more crime!
 Weak newscasters are asking "is there a racial component to knockout attacks?" Of course there is and weakness will only make it worse!
 If you are lucky enough to catch a knockout assaulter before getting slugged, and you carry a gun, shoot the bastard (teach them a lesson)!
 Knockout assaults are the new rage by sick and depraved youth. We better start getting tough in this country-and they want to take our guns!
 Emails prove WH knew ObamaCare website wouldn't work in October -- why didn't they delay the launch? 
 I answered my  fans questions via video- watch- 
 70 stores above Punta Pacifica's pristine peninsula,  offers fine dining, five pools & luxury rooms 
 Host of the 2017 U.S. Women's Open, Trump Bedminster has been rated one of America's best golf courses.
 We have wasted an enormous amount of blood and treasure in Afghanistan. Their government has zero appreciation. Let's get out!
 Florida Power & Light did a fantastic job of providing service & energy during the big storm in Palm Beach. 
 Today will be a great day at work - have only one word in mind, VICTORY!
    I'm watching Joe (who is 100% correct on Afghanistan) fondling the once great Time Magazine-so sad to see how skimpy it is!
 Do not allow our very stupid leaders to sign a deal that keeps us in Afghanistan through 2024-with all costs by U.S.A.  MAKE AMERICA GREAT!
 Congrats to Congress on their 112 'gold tier' healthcare plans  Why should they suffer like regular Americans?
 When Warren Buffett & others play w/ bankruptcy, nobody cares—when Trump plays the game, it becomes a big deal! 
   I create jobs!
  Thanks.
  Thanks.
  Sad!
   Thank you.
  So true!
 Offering true luxury,  has spectacular restaurants, Olympic pools & six professional tennis courts 
 $1B down another $1B to go. ObamaCare website is 40% unfinished. This is beyond pathetic.
 Congratulations to  on the success of his new book "Undisputed Truth" &  special--and thanks for the nice words, Mike.
   True!
  Great!
    Thank you.
 Emin from Russia--a very talented guy. All proceeds go to help the Philippines.  #missuniverse 
 Afghanistan leaders want the U.S. to keep 20, 000 troops there for many more years, fully paid for by the U.S., but first they want apology.
 Work is fun, deals are fun, life is fun - but love of a great family makes it all come together. Go out there and make your family proud.
 ALWAYS BORROW MONEY FROM A PESSIMIST BECAUSE HE WILL NEVER EXPECT IT TO BE PAID BACK!
 Trump Signature Collection offers style & sophistication. The perfect holiday gift.  Exclusively  
 “Advertising is totally unnecessary. Unless you hope to make money.”  - Jef I. Richards
 The next ObamaCare disaster will be doctors being dropped from plans.
 Broken promises. A broken billion dollar website. ObamaCare can’t be fixed. Repeal!
 Jamie Dimon just gave away $13B to government in settlement. Terrible move & bad precedent.  Could have done much better by fighting.
 Priorities. While Obama wastes billions on a broken website, he is going to cut military pay  No surprise.
 Guess who is talking to  at  Not terrible hair! 
 64 stories of golden glass over the strip,  elite hotel rooms feature floor-to-ceiling windows 
 One of  top private clubs,  features a Jim Fazio designed 7,291 yd par 72 course 
    Chuck--very fair, best wishes!
 Just as I said last October, census workers cooked the job numbers for Obama right before the election 
 Last October on   attacked  and I for saying Obama cooked the job number. Will he apologize?
 FLASHBACK -  October 9, 2012: “Donald Trump: Jobs Numbers Are 'A Lot Of Monkey Business'”   Proven right again!
 Congratulations to  on her big move to  She is a total winner!
 I got George Zimmerman right- watch- 
 Go to work today, be smart, think positively and WIN!
 I took some heat a long time ago when I said that George Zimmerman was a sicko and bad news. I know people and this guy is no good-trouble!
 Our heartfelt prayers go out to our fellow Americans suffering from the storms & tornadoes.
 W/ signature Trump amenities, 5 star rooms & world-class restaurants,  brings excellence to Hawaii 
 President Obama played golf yesterday???
 The polls have shown that DEAD PEOPLE voted for President Obama overwhelmingly and without hesitation - he must be doing something right!
 I will be going to Trump National Doral in Miami early today to check on the construction of the hotel and the new Blue Monster. AMAZING!
 How did the NCAA, which is weak and becoming irrelevant, extract such a big & reputation shattering settlement from Penn State. Others zero!
 Maybe some of the dead voters who helped get President Obama elected can be brought back to life after signing up for ObamaCare.
 The wimps that run Penn State should be forced to resign (and be sued) for the pathetic settlement they made and destruction of great legacy
 I wonder if the Rutgers coach who had the audacity to yell at the player is a proponent of global warming?
 Football coaches are no longer allowed to scream and yell at their players because it is discriminatory,racist and can be viewed as bullying
 I wonder what the late, great Vince Lombardi would say about the Rutgers football player who says he is being bullied because coach yelled?
 The real J.P.Morgan is spinning in his grave at the ridiculous settlements the bank is making to settle disputes. A settler is a soft target
 13 BILLION, 4.5 BILLION-these are the stupid settlements that J.P.Morgan just made. Why don't they FIGHT? No wonder they keep getting sued.
    Very good!
    Thanks Gary.
    Thank you for your fair and balanced reporting. You provide a great and important service to the people of Scotland!
    Great job in helping our wonderful Miss Universe - there is nobody like you - CONGRATULATIONS!
 “Winning is habit. Unfortunately, so is losing.” - Vince Lombardi
 Again, more dead people voted in the last election than enrolled in ObamaCare. Congratulations America!
 Rumor has it Apple is going to release iPhones with bigger screens. That's good news.
 “Be tough, be smart, be personable but don’t take things personally. That’s good business.” – Think Like a Champion
 “A true business only exists to solve a problem and to make life better.” – Midas Touch
 The only deal the Republicans should accept is a complete repeal of ObamaCare. You have them on the run - don't fold - go for it!
 Did President Obama have a rough day yesterday, or what? He has got to start telling the truth - NO MORE LIES OR DECEPTION!
 The cast has been largely selected for next year's Celebrity Apprentice.  Wait 'till you hear the names-AMAZING! Season 14-many nights at #1
    Yes, online through Macy's.
 . visited my office- tall and beautiful! 
 “He who defends everywhere, defends nowhere.” – Sun Tzu
 I'll be on  On the Record tonight to talk about the ObamaCare fiasco--7 pm on Fox News
 Obama friend got a no-bid $635M contract to build website  And now she will get more to fix it.
 More dead people voted in the last election than enrolled in ObamaCare. Congratulations America!
   True!
 Breaking news--negotiations with Iranians broke down because Obama insisted that they use ObamaCare.
 President Obama is the best thing that ever happened to Jimmy Carter!
 In a new poll a majority of people felt  the president "knowingly lied" about health care pledge. Who are the fools who don't think he lied?
   You are doing really great - keep it up (of which I have no doubt).
 ICYMI-- "                Reading newspapers and see...  #BillyGraham95 #happybirthday   
 The same people that built the ObamaCare website used, as the face of the website, someone who is not a US citizen. Incompetent.
 Can you believe it—the model who mysteriously disappeared from the ObamaCare website is not a US citizen—she’s from Colombia.
 No matter how far down a path you go, if it's the wrong path, turn around and go back home - before it is too late.
 ObamaCare is on LIFE SUPPORT - it will soon be DEAD ON ARRIVAL - A bad concept that was imcompetently administered!
 President Obama is under pressure from Democrats to undo his lie on ObamaCare. His problem is that such a move would end ObamaCare.
 ObamaCare is one of the worst political disasters of all time - 4,992,343 AMERICANS LOSING COVERAGE, LESS THAN 50,OOO NEW SIGNUPS.
 Everyone should watch the documentary ‘Windfall’ on  See an upstate NY town ruined by environmentalists & windfarms.
   has exposed the massive ObamaCare fraud perpetuated by Navigator Programs 
  &  “Director’s Cut” has 4 days to go until it meets its  goal 
 Via   Donald Trump Planning Skyscraper in Moscow 
      Crocus City Hall in Moscow is a fabulous place!
 Miss USA pageant had a 4 to 1 vote in favor, but it won't be in Miami Doral in 2014-- Mayor Boria voted against it. I want total support!
   Emin, your performance at Miss Universe was fantastic - you are a STAR!
    Thank you!
   Thank you.
 “True courage is being afraid, and going ahead and doing your job anyhow!” - General Norman Schwarzkopf
    I had a great weekend with you and your family. You have done a FANTASTIC job. TRUMP TOWER-MOSCOW is next. EMIN was WOW!
 . gave one of the greatest endings to a show ever  Standing ovation!
 Happy Veterans Day to ALL, in particular to the haters and losers who have no idea how lucky they are!!!
 WE WILL ONLY BE THE LAND OF THE FREE AS LONG AS WE ARE HOME OF THE BRAVE!
 Don't worry, when our country starts hurting bad enough from all of the mistakes that are being made, we will start doing the right things.
 While I was in Moscow I see that President Obsma apologized for his lie, I mean statement, on ObamaCare! How nice of him to be so forthright
 The Republicans must be patient and smart - ObamaCare could sweep them into office in far greater numbers than anyone ever thought possible!
 If Justice Roberts had done the right thing and voted against ObamaCare, our country would be in a lot better shape right now! TOTAL TURMOIL
 Drew Brees is having a great game - a fantastic quarterback and really good guy!
 If we could force Russia, China and other competitors to use ObamaCare, we would be able to instantly destroy their great economic success!
 Remember that I predicted a long time ago that President Obama will attack Iran because of his inability to negotiate properly-not skilled!
 I will be on Fox & Friends tomorrow morning at 7.ºº
 I just got back from Russia-learned lots & lots. Moscow is a very interesting and amazing place! U.S. MUST BE VERY SMART AND VERY STRATEGIC.
 I was just given a great tour of Moscow - fantastic, hard working people. CITY IS REALLY ENERGIZED! The World will be watching tonight!
 I'm in Moscow for Miss Universe tonight - picking a winner is very hard, they are all winners. Total sellout of arena. Big night in Russia!
 Leadership: Whatever happens, you're responsible. If it doesn't happen, you're responsible.
 Being successful requires nothing less than 100% of your concentrated effort. Be totally focused.
 Success tip: Be ready for problems, and be patient--there are very few cases of instant gratification.
 The ObamaCare disaster will increase the amount of uninsured  What is the point of this Trillion $ monstrosity?
 “Don’t toss off your problems, and don’t dwell on them either. Deal with them!” – Think Like a Champion
 “Read the Bible. Work hard and honestly. And don't complain.” – Rev. 
 Upstate New York needs jobs. Frack Now & Frack Fast! Pay off NY State debt.
 We still have not learned the full truth on Benghazi.  Four Americans were killed. Congress must act!
 At least 3.5M fellow Americans are going to lose their healthcare plans because of ObamaCare. Defund then repeal!
 Congratulations to the $1B ObamaCare website on enrolling FOUR in Delaware. Cost to us - $4M 
 Looking forward to attending the GREAT Rev.  birthday party tonight--there's nobody like him!
 Had dinner this week at  (at Trump World Tower) opposite the United Nations—fantastic food! 212.964.7777
 It’s that time of the year.  in Central Park is now open--best rink in the world.  A landmark.
 My speech at  Bartlet Gala Dinner where I received  Entrepreneur Award 
                         2013|"THEBillMcGee              a year of wear your shirts still look great! Glad I made the purchase!" Thank you.
 I will be going to Asheville, North Carolina, tonight for the 95th birthday party of the GREAT Billy Graham - such a wonderful man!
 If Democrats do not start opposing ObamaCare, and fast, Republicans will have a massive victory in 2014 - far greater than any predictions!
 A level will be reached where ObamaCare will be so out of control, expensive and unwieldy that the biggest supporters will abandon ship.
 Prediction: The disaster known as ObamaCare will only get worse and Republicans will gain far greater power than they have had in years!
 Put Kathleen Sebelius out of her misery and lovingly say, YOU'RE FIRED! Let her go home to her family and rest. BRING IN TOP FLIGHT PEOPLE!
 She is so sad and pathetic that I almost feel sorry for Sec.Sebelius. She has done great harm to many people and must be fired. Incompetent!
 Just sit back and watch, ObamaCare is such a disaster it will fall like a house of broken cards. The website is the best part of this mess!
 When Obama tried to tweak his previous statement on ObamaCare he made it an even greater lie-even the Senate Democrats are angry with him!
 Brian  wrote a wonderful book called "George Washington's Secret Six" that is truly worth reading. 
 Use your intelligence and your education to execute what your imagination presents to you. This is one step to becoming an entrepreneur.
 Job tip: If you were the employer, what kind of person would you most desire as an employee? Be that person.
 Success tip: See yourself as victorious. This will focus you in the right direction. Apply your skills and talent--and be tenacious.
 With terrific Steve Wynn at dinner last night. 
 “If you put the federal government in charge of the Sahara Desert, in 5 years there'd be a shortage of sand.” – Milton Friedman
  You're right--doesn't fit my image.
   Thank you.
  Thank you.
  Thank you.
                         2013|"thilan_GolfSwag                 Played Doral for the first time. absolutely great course! Fantastic job!" Thanks.
  No, #Darnell does.
 “Recognize that the world needs more entrepreneurs. Everyone is counting on you.” – Midas Touch
 Our NOBEL PRIZE FOR PEACE president said "I'm really good at killing people" according to just out book Double Down. Can Oslo retract prize?
 The truth is that we could have much better healthcare in our country at a much more affordable price - everyone in U.S. would benefit!
 Can you believe that the builder of the failed ObamaCare website was just given a new government contract - how stupid is that - CLUELESS!!!
 Not only does Obama spy on German leaders, he criticizes their trade surplus  We should have a trade surplus!
 The  event featured a performance by #CelebApprentice  a great event for a great cause! Watch- 
 Revisionist history. Now Obama claims he never told us that everyone could keep their healthcare plans. Crazy!
 Hitting at home. Democrat Sen. Joe Donnelly’s son had his healthcare plan dropped 
 Sen.   &  w/   demand 'Congress Live By Your Laws' 
  &  are hosting Trump  2013 Pageant  in Moscow. They will be terrific!
 #TrumpVine on ObamaCare website- 
 I hope everybody reads the  article “Shakedown Schneiderman” – the AG of New York  
 The  article, "Shakedown Schneiderman" about NY State lightweight  is amazing. 
 I would gain a whole new respect for President Obama if he would say, "look, we made a big mistake, sorry!" No more lies or deception.
 Lies and incompetence - the two words that are most closely associated with ObamaCare!
 Wow, just watching the news.ObamaCare and the website are TOTALLY OUT OF CONTROL. Costs are through the roof. This could be ruinous to U.S.!
  House has the right bill: “If you like your healthcare plan, you can keep it.” The Senate must take it up on a vote!
 The ObamaCare website will cost over $1.5B when all is said and done. Crazy!
 Hope & Change. Millions are losing their healthcare plans, & ObamaCare is taking cancer patients’ doctors away 
  Never give up!
 Beauty arrives to Moscow’s Crocus City Hall this 11.9.!  On  the world will watch  2013 crowned 
   Have passion for your work and keep focused.
  Great!
 Everyone is telling me that  is going to run against lightweight  would win!
   Thanks.
    True--he is killing Scotland!
 Will be on Fox & Friends in five minutes - enjoy and good morning!
 Millions losing healthcare plans despite President Obama's promise that this WOULD NOT HAPPEN! What about a massive protest march on D.C.
 Via  "Miss Universe 2013: Contestants Stun in Gorgeous Gowns at National Gift Auction Gala" 
 “Winners see problems as just another way to prove themselves.” – Think Like a Champion
 Located in Tribeca, each  hotel room features floor to window ceilings for a view of lower Manhattan 
 “Do your duty and a little more and the future will take care of itself.” - Andrew Carnegie
   Thanks.
   True.
 The bus driver who saved the woman from jumping off the bridge was really cool, great guy. I'm going to send him $10, 000-he deserves it!
 “Successful people keep moving. They make mistakes, but they don't quit.” – Conrad Hilton
  Thanks.
  Thanks.
 So we can spy on our ally’s leaders but can’t water board terrorists?
 It’s Thursday.  is still a very dumb guy--just look at his past.
 “If you like your healthcare plan you can keep it.” = “I was born in Hawaii.”
 Not only did the $1B ObamaCare website not work, it can’t even protect your personal information  A disaster.
 Congratulations to Boston on the  World Series victory. Earned and deserved.
 Still looking to give away a RECORD $1M reward on  for a crowd funding campaign 
 . is Panama City’s premiere hotel. 70 stories over Punta Pacifica, excellence has arrived to So. America 
 Gary Sinise is doing tremendous work for veterans through his foundation—check it out 
 The ObamaCare website is unfixable &  rumor has it that they will stop checks & balances—a free-for-all that will cost the country trillions
 “Learn, work, and think in equal proportions, and you’ll be going in the right direction.” – Think Like a Champion
 “The best entrepreneurs believe the true measure of success has to do with the number of jobs their business creates.” – Midas Touch
 Both of our New York hotels are on the Top Ten list of the most luxurious hotels in NYC...  Congrats to all!
 Isn't the WORLD tired of hearing President Obama say he knew nothing about anything-time to take responsibility for all of your mistakes!
 Looks like a very good World Series game!
 How come Snowden and ObamaCare have access to all records and information but don't have even the smallest tidbits on President Obama?
 ObamaCare is a disaster and Snowden is a spy who should be executed-but if it and he could reveal Obama's records,I might become a major fan
 “You're never a loser until you quit trying.” - Mike Ditka
 China just called. They want to lend Obama another $1B for the ObamaCare web site.
 Via  “The ObamaCare Awakening: Americans are losing their coverage by political design.” 
 If Obama was willing to lie about ObamaCare then what else has he lied to us about…
 Four brave Americans died in Benghazi. Administration is still covering up the truth. We deserve to know the full truth.
 Congrats to  on the release of his new book “Rush Revere and the Brave Pilgrims.” #1 on  and  Must read!
 Via  “Donald Trump's Blackdog victory” 
 It is now a FACT that President Obama lied in order to get ObamaCare passed-that is fraud and the legislation should be recinded-INTERESTING
 A great victory in Scotland ...  http://someotherlink.com/
 I hear  really bombed in Springfield--people were leaving show way early--stupid guy!
 Won’t be a buyer’s market for long. If you can, purchase a home but remember, I told you this three years ago.
 Congrats  on revealing that Obama knew millions of Americans would lose their healthcare plans 
 Fact – all the countries complaining about us spying on them spy on us. They just don't get caught--stupid!
 1.5M have already lost their health care plans thanks to ObamaCare   Defund now and Repeal later!
 .  of Scotland may be the dumbest leader of the free world. I can’t imagine that anyone wants him in office.
 . –the man who let terrorist (Pan Am Flight 103) al-Megrahi  go, lost another battle over ugly wind turbines in Blackdog.
 . suffered a huge defeat by the people of Blackdog. Communities all over Scotland are fighting this loser.
 When will  realize that he's destroying Scotland--the most beautiful countryside in the world w/ his stupid wind turbines?
 Great victory for people of Blackdog, Scotland. They defeated substation, stopping inefficient & ugly wind turbines.
 On 1,300 acres in Charlottesville,  wine has been awarded the coveted Virginia Double Gold Medal 
 Maybe if Obama knew too much about the spying it would be worse than knowing nothing - but either way it is just another disaster!
 I just don't know why some of these NFL teams with lousy quarterbacks don't give Tim Tebow a chance - what do they have to lose?
 There are so many blatant lies coming out of the ADMINISTRATION - healthcare, spying, NSA, IRS, brutally killed Americans -WILL IT EVER END?
 Does anybody really think that President Obama didn't know about our spying on the leaders of allies around the world - not possible!
 Like your current health care plan? Too bad, you’re going to lose it under ObamaCare. Hope, Change & a  300% Increase in Your Premium.
 Iraq is being ravaged by Al Qaeda. Country in utter chaos & all oil is going to Iran & China  Terrible mistake!
 Contractors can blame Obama admin all day for their $600M failure but both parties are at fault--pay taxpayers back.
 Sebelius didn't test $635M (probably $1B) ObamaCare website until “a couple of days leading up to the launch.” 
 I don’t know why our allies are so surprised Obama is tapping their phones? Nothing changes!
 Via  by Myra Per-Lee: “Got A Great Idea? Get Donald Trump To Fund It” 
 Time for Sebelius to be fired. She has admitted that the Administration did not vet the ObamaCare website 
 Thanks to ObamaCare’s device tax, Boston Scientific plans to cut 1,500 jobs  ObamaCare will kill ingenuity.
 The signature restaurant of   is both  Forbes Five-Star & AAA Five-Diamond restaurant 
 Yesterday was Matt Drudge's birthday --Happy Birthday  great job!
  Because he paid me far more than it was worth!
  Sadly true!
 Will be on Fox & Friends tomorrow morning at 7.00.  Will be discussing the disgusting and wasteful $635 million website rollout and more!
 The new line of Trump ties, shirts and cufflinks are out at Macy's and are really beautiful at a really reasonable.price. Go check them out!
 President Obama should bring Secretaty Sebelius into his office, look right into her beautiful blue eyes and say,with emotion, YOU'RE FIRED!
   Great game against Tennessee  by the most unappreciated (by the media) quarterback in college football - and no more tattoos!
 Good night everyone - sleep well and tomorrow have many victories!
 I must say that some of these college football games are great tonight-very exciting-I wish I had more time to watch!
    Thank you-always a good thought.
 Isn't it amazing that the U.S. and NSA can listen to the highly protected phone conversations of world leaders but can't get O's records!
 At this point the legacy of the Obama Administration will be, sadly, that of THE GANG THAT COULDN'T SHOOT STRAIGHT - what a pathetic mess!
 With the $635 million dollar website fiasco, getting caught tapping phones of WORLD LEADERS and so much more, U.S. is looking really stupid!
 Can you imagine the anger and disgust when the heads of other countries found out that their cell phones were being tapped by NSA.Obama mess
  Great taste, enjoy!
 First Titantic sunk on its maiden voyage.Next the Hindenburg explodes on its first flight to America.Now we suffer the ObamaCare rollout!
 When a complex website is broken the best thing to do is blow it up and start all over again-then sue the culprits and use the proper team!
 The Audacity of Ineptitude – ObamaCare website will cost over $1B   When will someone finally be held accountable?
 “You want to compete, and you want to compete at the highest level.” - 
 Great meeting  at  dinner. Besides his great acting, Gary does tremendous work for vets through his foundation.
 .  Thank you for the T. Boone Pickens Entrepreneur Award—a great honor for me from a fantastic man.
 Jeffrey Lord  you for the presentation—terrific job!
 Bob Tyrrell  you--and also for the great work you do.
 Great evening with the  & the T. Boone Pickens Entrepreneur Award. Amazing crowd—thank you!
 Good advice from my mother, Mary MacLeod Trump: “Trust in God and be true to  yourself.”
 Good advice from my father, Fred C. Trump: "Know everything you can about what you're doing."
 You've got something unique to offer. Find out what it is. Ask yourself: What can I provide that does not yet exist?
   Thanks.
 “Discovery breeds discovery, as in success breeds success. Questions are thoughts with a quest.” – Think Like a Champion
 It was just determined that the woman who passed out at Obama’s press conference had just seen what her new premiums would be!
   Great!
  Yes and thanks.
    Apology accepted.
 If the Saudis are so concerned about Syria then they should go in themselves. Stop telling us to do their dirty work.
 I’ll soon be leaving for Washington where  will give me the T. Boone Pickens Entrepreneur Award. Very exciting!
 Where’s the accountability for the $635M website fiasco in the Obama administration? Heads should roll and officials should be fired
 On Fifth Avenue, the iconic  is one of NYC's most heavily visited tourist attractions 
 Why doesn't President Obama call upon the NSA to fix the badly broken website-then they could spy on all of the many cheaters & arrest them!
 Honestly, whether you're for or against ObamaCare, the 635 million dollar website fiasco is bad for the U.S. It makes us look totally inept!
 Breaking news - The Washington Redskins have just announced that they will be removing the name Washington from their name!
 If you want to succeed, keep your edge. Staying on top of all new developments in your sector = major advantage that pays dividends.
 The most luxurious hotel in downtown Manhattan,  is a top destination 
 Have time to waste? Go to the ObamaCare website.
 “America is too great for small dreams.” — Pres. Ronald Reagan
 Looking forward to receiving the T. Boone Pickens Entrepreneur Award at tomorrow’s  Robert L. Bartley Gala dinner.
 Via  by Jeffrey Lord: “Donald Trump: America’s Entrepreneur”   Wow--thank you to Jeffrey Lord & 
   Great, thanks!
 “Sure, the home-field is an advantage - but so is having a lot of talent.” - 
 Message to Edward Snowden, you’re banned from  Unless you want me to take you back home to face justice!
 On November 9th  comes to Moscow! Hosted by the wonderful duo of  &  in Crocus City Hall!
 Doing an interview with  Discussing the ObamaCare  web disaster. Be sure to listen 
 Winner of the 5 Star Diamond Award,  brings luxury & elite amenities to LA's top public golf course 
 Where’s the global warming? 2013 was one of the least extreme years in weather on record 
 Help fund  new show ‘American Made’ on   John is on  today re project.
 Via  “Trump eyes PGA tour for Dubai golf course” 
   Thanks.
   Thanks, good luck.
   Hi Ryan.
 . magazine is doing so poorly that they make even  look good. Graydon Carter should’ve been fired a long time ago.
  Great, thanks.
 “Sixteen”  is winning accolades and is a destination point restaurant—don’t miss it!
 Trump Int’l Hotel & Tower Chicago is one of very few hotels in No. America w/ a 5 Star, 5 Diamond Hotel & a 5 Star, 5 Diamond Restaurant...
  They get fired.
   Thank you, good luck.
 Doing Fox and Friends in two minutes!
 I would bet that we have many great American technology companies that would build and fix the pathetic ObamaCare website for ZERO dollars!
 Why doesn't President Obama just get the people from Google to fix the failed   website. In fact, why didn't he use them in the first place!
   Very nice, best wishes!
  Good question!
    I hope everybody possible cancels their subscription to the failing, boring abd totally biased New York "Ragazine"-SAVE YOUR MONEY!
 THE ROLLOUT OF OBAMACARE IS A TOTAL DISASTER AND AN EMBARRASSMENT TO OUR COUNTRY. THE WORLD IS WATCHING AND LAUGHING.$635,000,000 WEBSITE!
    In every interview New York Magazine has done for years they ask the same question - "What do you think of Donald Trump?" Beggars!
   Can you imagine a top editor at New York Magazine calling for my death-if they were responsible, he would be fired! Totally biased.
    Wow, numbers are really looking bad at  New York Magazine. While very boring, it is also very biased. Too bad, was once great!
 Just like its website, ObamaCare is a disaster.Maybe all those who are fighting it are wasting their time-it will fail on its own!
 Secy. Sebelius, who was responsible for the horrendous ObamaCare rollout, should resign or be fired.Refuses to go before Congress to explain
    Thomas, you will be a fantastic host of the Miss Universe Pageant live from Moscow on Nov 9. Great doing your show today!
 I hope everyone that read  reprehensible statement will cancel their subscription to  in protest. Let me know.
 No wonder  is doing so poorly, with an idiot Sr. Editor like  it will only get worse!
   A terrible statement like that shows how desperate you and your magazine are. You should be ashamed.
 Canadians kicked out the firm that the U.S. paid all that money to for the failed website. How stupid are our "leaders"? This is a scandal!
 Wow, China's growth accelerated 7.8% in third quarter.  If the U.S. had half that number we would be the talk of the World - need leadership
 No surprise Saudis turned down spot on UN Security Council. They don’t want  responsibility. Just have us do their heavy lifting.
 I love watching the dishonest writers  suffer the magazine’s failure.
  sales are so dismal that w/ its record 2013 losses it is going bi-weekly  Should end pain & just fold.
 Our country is being run by total amateurs. Let’s just call it “amateur hour.”
 Can you imagine a Canadian company developing our website? Terrible way to put Americans back to work.
 Honored to be attending Rev.  95th birthday. His life & work has brought hope & faith to millions worldwide.
 This will be one of the biggest and most beautiful Miss Universe events ever.
 The 2013 MISS UNIVERSE® Pageant will take place in Russia for the very first time in the 62 year history of the contest.
   Thank you.
   Thank you.
     So nice, thank you.
  Thanks!
 ObamaCare website fiasco was a SINGLE bid to a Canadian company - terrible!
 I build beautiful websites with very smart and imaginative people for almost NOTHING. OUR GOVERNMENT SPENT ALMOST $535, 000, 000 for NOTHING
 The contract to build the ObamaCare website was given to a CANADIAN company for $55, 744, 081. It then bloated to $292, 071,067 INCOMPETENCE
 By the way, New York State MUST LOWER TAXES (and fast) and must start going after all of the "energy" that lies just below our feet (now)!
 Thanks for all of the great support but I just don't see myself wanting to run for Governor of New York - I have something else in mind!
 I'm on the David Letterman  tonight--looking forward to it. 11:35 PM on CBS.
 Gain and use information to your advantage--see every day as an opportunity to learn.
 A winning attitude will put everything in perspective. Keep negative thoughts and people where they belong--out of the big picture.
 Apple must make the IPhone screen bigger. Losing major market share.
 Obama administration is killing American industrial renaissance by stopping drilling and fracking. Terrible for economy.
 Via  "Golden Bear and American business tycoon finish their unlikely masterpiece" 
 Entrepreneurship is engine of American success. I bring it to crowdfunding w/  $1M RECORD reward 
 .  Read 'Midas Touch' -- great book for entrepreneurs. Good luck!
   Read 'Midas Touch' -- great book for entrepreneurs. Good luck!
 Remember, if you don't pat yourself on the back, nobody else will. Take credit for your successes and don't let others forget!!!!!!
 I'm glad that Mark Cuban won the ridiculous case with the    S.E.C.  It never should have been brought in the first place!
 What a great day it was yesterday showing the public Trump Links at Ferry Point. I took over a disaster and made it GREAT! Good job to all!
     True and thanks.
  So nice, thank you.
  Thanks.
  Thank you.
  Thank you.
 . was just rated “Best Room Service” in LV by The Daily Meal. Congrats to my Las Vegas staff! 
 Just left Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point.  Ribbon cutting w/ &  was spectacular. Lots of people & jobs!
 Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point will host many major championships over the years. Great thing for NYC—congratulations to all!
 Trump Links will be a great championship golf course that will host many major tournaments and bring tremendous $'s & prestige to N.Y.C.!
 Will be cutting ribbon at           10 A.M. with Mayor Bloomberg and Jack Nicklaus for the opening of TRUMP LINKS at FERRY POINT.
 Republicans seem intent on negotiating against themselves. Many senior Senators are doing Obama’s bidding. Can’t win this way.
 Al Qaeda terrorist Al Libi was immediately read his rights & is now being treated for ‘pre-existing’ medical (cont) 
   Happy Birthday!
 “Experience, knowledge, & prescience are a formidable combination of powers. Do not underestimate any of them.”  Think Like a Champion
 Thanks to all for the wonderful congratulation sent to me on the birth of Ivanka's little boy - so nice!
 My beautiful daughter Ivanka just had a healthy baby boy. Jared and Ivanka are very proud!
    So nice, thank you.
    Thank you for your great confidence! OUR STATE, LIKE OUR COUNTRY, IS IN SERIOUS TROUBLE. Keep up the good fight.
  Perhaps--no decision yet.
  New look for Blue Monster: signature golf course is more challenging & fan friendlier 
  Thanks--
   Thanks.
  Thank you.
  My honor.
  It will be the country's finest resort!
  Thanks.
 As an addition, Apple must go to a larger screen now--asap! They're losing their standing in the market!
  You have to have passion for your work. That's crucial. Then focus on it and don't give up.
  Keep the big picture in mind. There are always opportunities and possibilities, and thinking too small can negate a lot of them.
 Ranked a top course  & 6 Star Diamond Award, Trump Int’l Palm Beach has been expanded to 27 holes 
   Great.
   Thank you Christine.
    Happy birthday to my baby - and keep up the great work at school. We are all proud of you!
    Thank you!
 Somebody got rich building the ObamaCare website which doesn't even come close to working - where has the money gone?
 I know a great deal about websites etc. but I am unable to understand how our government spent $635 million on the ObamaCare site-& disaster
    Great news!
    Thank you.
  Thank you and true!
   True!
   Thank you.
   Thanks.
 Many countries including allies already see China as world superpower  We have greatest military, yet no respect
 How do you spend over $635M on websites and they don't work?
 Congrats to Jim Lipton and Inside the Actors Studio for winning the Emmy Award for the 250th Episode. I was honored to appear in it.
 Weekly jobless claims soared to 21.5%, a 6 month high  ObamaCare, the greatest job killer in US history.
   Quickly.
   Piers is a good man, even if we disagree with him.
 Personally, I think Douglas Durst’s brother got screwed by Douglas—no wonder he’s angry!
 Why is Douglas Durst allowed to use the World Trade Center to get out of a lease with Conde Nast?
 I wouldn’t use  to design a doghouse, let alone a house or building!
  a highly overrated architect, has had many problems with buildings he designed downtown--& others!
 Lightweight  is pushing for the Moreland Commission to be disbanded immediately—because he is being looked at!
 “Problems, setbacks, mistakes & losses are all part of life. We shouldn't be shocked if and when they happen.” – Think Like a Champion
 “If it’s worth doing, it’s worth fighting for. You’ll have lots of people and obstacles in your way. Work & fight to get beyond them."
 Jack Welch thinks Sam Palmisano, retired CEO of IBM, should be the next CEO of MICROSOFT. Interesting!
    Thank you.
    Tell John he is a total winner!
     4th now! David should have seen his interview with  truly amazing."
    Your family and dad are great-your mother must have been amazing!
  I urge every politician in Washington to tune into CNN and listen to  's advice on how to do a deal."
    Watch CNN tonight as Piers and I discuss Obama, SHUTDOWN, leadership and many other topics of interest - 9 PM - 10 minutes!
 I will be on  tonight at 9PM. 
 I’ll be doing  show tonight on CNN at 9 PM.  Will be very  interesting. (I hope!)
 If you don’t treat yourself like royalty, no one else will.  is Honolulu's most luxurious hotel 
 Obama has called  terrorists during this showdown. It’s a shame he really doesn’t think it because then he would meet all  demands.
 Obama is the most profligate deficit & debt spender in our nation’s history. Doubled debt (cont) 
 Obama’s job approval is at 37%, a record low.  &  have the leverage & momentum. Delay ObamaCare for all Americans!
 Obama can open the Mall for illegals to protest our country yet he continues to barricade WWII memorial. That’s an absolute disgrace.
 “Golf is deceptively simple and endlessly complicated. It satisfies the soul and frustrates the intellect. (cont) 
  Thank you.
  Thank you.
   Great!
 “My advice to you regarding momentum is definitive: Get yours going!” – Think Like a Champion
 Re Florida Power & Light—Most important is safety but they have to also cater to aesthetics & not ruin the beauty of Florida.
 I pay millions of $’s a year to Florida Power & Light & they can’t give us what we want. Maybe a major class action suit against them?
 “You miss 100% of the shots you don't take.” - Wayne Gretzky
 Entrepreneurs who develop their Midas Touch do not work for money. They work to create or acquire assets. Focus on assets.
 At 96 stories above Michigan Avenue, if you’re not staying at the 5 star  then you’re in its shadow 
 Via  “ project will boast 800 hotel rooms”  $250M renovation on 800 acres in sunny Miami.
 “Don’t emphasize the problem so much-emphasize the solution. It’s a mindset that works.” – Think Like a Champion
 If the U.S. Government doesn't give the money necessary for the burials of our military personnel, I will.The U.S. under Obama's leadership!
 It is outrageous and disgusting that families of U.S. MILITARY personnel killed in action will not be given money for burials. SAD!
   I notice, thanks Genall!
 With President Obama it's all talk and no action. Our country is in desperate need of smart and decisive leadership before it is too late!
 I'm just so tired of listening to the same old rhetoric and words, day after day, from our President. It's time to stop talking-WORK!
 Florida Power & Light has disgusting rotting utility poles outside Doral in Miami. They should put in new ones or will be sued.
 In my opinion, one of the worst utility companies in the country is Florida Power and Light.
 The White House has just admitted Al Qaeda was involved in Benghazi  What about the video tape?
 Did you ever think our country would  become an economic basket case? So much for Hope & Change.
 The new reality, China and Japan are warning us not to default   Reckless government spending has made us weak.
 Had a great time on  inaugural 7PM show. Congrats to Greta  on the new spot!
 . has leverage. Must stay united & on message.
 If you are steadfast in your efforts and self respect, critics will be harmless. Keep your focus!
 Expect the best from people. They will rise to the challenge and  it's important to inspire confidence.
   Thanks.
    True.
   Thanks.
  Thank you.
 President Obama wants to change the name of the "White House" because it is highly discriminating and not at all politically correct!
 President should not be telling the Washington Redskins to change their name-our country has far bigger problems! FOCUS on them,not nonsense
 My sense is that people are far angrier at the President than they are at Congress re the shutdown—an interesting turn!
 “Do not allow fear to settle into place in any part of your life. It is a defeating attitude & a negative emotion" Think Like a Champion
 With the debt limit approaching,  has even more leverage. If they stay united and on message they can win.
 “We build too many walls and not enough bridges.” - Isaac Newton
 83% of the government is still running during the shutdown while 41% of nondefense federal workers are furloughed. Room for cuts.
 Obama is tougher on WWII vets wanting to visit a DC memorial than Iran. He needs to show respect to our vets and not play games.
 Government is shut down yet Obama is now harassing the privately owned  to change its name.He needs to focus on his job!
 Standing strong for his people,  is ignoring the Feds and keeping all Wisconsin parks open. Great!
 An iconic building and top tourist attraction,  sets New York City’s luxury standard  & great food!
 The Obama Administration has a very important duty to provide a budget - and then negotiate! OUR COUNTRY is a laughingstock!
   While I never ran, I thank you. Let's see what happens in the future!
 “Compete with yourself to be the best you can be.” – Think Like a Champion
 “The minute that you’re not learning I believe you’re dead.” – Jack Nicholson
 “Trumps Are Giving  A Makeover”  via 
 While the Pres. of Iran tweets sweet nothings to Obama he forbids the Iranians to use twitter. Very revealing.
 When will lightweight hack Attorney General be investigated for his repeated prosecutorial misconduct? 
 Must read editorial today about lightweight New York State Attorney General Eric Schneiderman. Is he a crook? 
 Congrats to  on the success of the new smash show  Fantastic suspense. Great acting. Must see TV!
 Obama has unilaterally & unconstitutionally drawn 4 ObamaCare exemptions for his friends. All  wants is (cont) 
 Total misnomer to call ObamaCare ‘The Affordable Care Act.’ Affordable for whom besides big businesses & Congress w/their exemptions?
 My  #Politicking interview w/ on the govt. shutdown, ObamaCare, Putin, 2016 and  
   Thanks!
  So true!
 Just read  bestseller book—really great!
 Congrats to people of Scotland on the Judge’s ruling concerning bird killing, land destroying, environmentally disastrous windmills.
 “Life is difficult no matter what, but hard work and perseverance make it a lot easier.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 “Going with your instincts requires tuning in to everything around your decision.” – Think Big
  Thanks.
 Great ruling on wind farm in Scotland—very smart judge! Front page article. 
 “Most entrepreneurs do not realize that wealth does not come from work, but from the assets they build.” –  Midas Touch
 “Great effort springs naturally from great attitude.” - Pat Riley
 Obama administration had 4 years to prepare for the ObamaCare rollout. And of course they failed miserably.
  continued incompetence has led to more people losing their jobs  She's a perpetual job loser.
 Obama and the Democrats have no respect for WWII vets trying to get into the memorial.
 Many Red-State Democrats sticking with Obama on deficit spending on the ObamaCare monstrosity will be defeated in 2014.
 Oil has been over $33/gallon for 34 months. A new record. And now with Obama’s war on coal, American families will be hit even harder.
 ‘Moderate’ Repubs plotting against  strategy have short term memories. Tea Party gave them majority in House & primaries aren't fun.
 Angela Merkel is doing a fantastic job as the Chancellor of Germany. Youth unemployment is at a record low & she has a budget surplus.
 On the shores of the Lake Norman,  features a world-class course designed by  
 My friend Larry King  asked me to do an interview with him—he was always great to me—& I agreed. Watch tonight 9 PM on RTV.
 “Know from inside out that you have the power to succeed and you will. That’s taking control.” – Think Like a Champion
 The most elite private club in the world, Mar-a-Lago, is Palm Beach’s legendary landmark. 
  Thanks, what a mess.
  I agree.
  They must go to a larger screen.
  Spring of '15.
  Tell your son congrats--great round on really tough course.
    Thank you.
 “Study: Insurance costs to soar under Obamacare”  Men in NC get 305% hike. Women in NE suffer an average 237% hike.
 Stocks rose yesterday during the first day of government shutdown. Markets like being left alone for a day.
 A-Rod’s appeal will go nowhere. He will get a long suspension. Good for the  And sends strong message to  players.
 Young entrepreneurs across the US are trying to make deals & build businesses daily. Stay positive, think big & big things will happen
 Democrats refused to vote down their ObamaCare subsidy. While Americans will be hit w/ rising premiums, Washington won’t feel any pain
 The ObamaCare disaster is in full swing. Websites are down, people can’t sign up and elderly can’t understand the lingo.
   UN address was a strong statement to the world that  will not allow Iran to get nuclear weapons.
 Congrats  new Fox show debuts w/ very strong ratings  Guess who her first guest was? Donald Trump.
 Sorry banks, when we accused lightweight AG Eric Schneiderman of not going after banks, he started going after banks—but years too late!
 #3. Cover your bases. Know everything you can about what you're doing.
 #2. Be totally focused. Being successful requires nothing less than 100% of your concentrated effort.
 #1. Be passionate--you have to love what you're doing to be successful at it.
 New York State's lightweight A.G. is driving business & jobs out of N.Y. Look into his past-he shouldn't even be allowed to hold office!
 Wow, three top MICROSOFT investors want Bill Gates out as Chairman. Do not like job he is doing!
 Can you imagine, with all of the talk about ObamaCare, technical breakdowns made it a disastrous day. Our government is badly broken!
 “Face reality as it is, not as it was or as you wish it to be.” - 
 “Your money should be at work at all times. Even in the worst economy, there is no excuse." - Think Like a Billionaire
 It is crucial for Republicans to remain united during this shutdown
 There have been 17 shutdowns since 1976, 14 under Reagan and Bush with Democrat Congresses who wanted more spending.
 Remember when Obama promised “you can keep your health care plan?” Not in these 10 states.  Another lie.
   Thanks.
 Nice guy  needs your help to make his bad guy movie Directors Cut--&gt;  
 It was an honor to be  inaugural guest on her new show ‘The Real Story.’ Gretchen will be a big success!
   Thanks.
 Obama has not passed a single budget in 4 years. Democrats don’t even vote them in Congress. He has failed to lead!
 Obama & the Democrats want this shutdown. They think it helps their electoral prospects for 2014. Don’t believe!
 Rated Toronto’s #1 hotel, the 65-story 5 Star  is located in the heart of the city’s finest attractions 
 Must read editorial via  "ObamaCare's Bitter Irony: It May Increase Number Of Uninsured" 
 Achievers move forward at all times. Achievement is not a plateau, it's a beginning.
 The Republicans can absolutely win if they stick together-but they are NOT sticking together. Sen. McCain just said "we can't win".Very bad!
 Remember that in 2006 then Senator Obama voted NOT TO INCREASE THE DEBT CEILING. Now he acts in disbelief as others plan to do the same!
 “Integrity is the essence of everything successful.” – Richard Buckminster Fuller
 Since stop & frisk was struck down, gun shootings & victims have spiked-- while gun seizures have decreased. 
    Dee Dee-- Great seeing you  You are really having a positive impact--don't ever stop.
   Thanks Larry--and you, too, are truly one of a kind!
  Happy Birthday!
 Trump Int'l Hotel & Tower Vancouver's original twisting design gives every unit a distinct view  A landmark!
 Business is an art in itself, and powerful negotiation skills are one of the techniques necessary to facilitate success.
 The commodity market is extremely fragile. Be wary of investing right now. The futures are way too dependent on the Fed.
 No one wants the government to shut down, but if ObamaCare is fully implemented then our country will eventually shutdown anyway!
    Thanks!
   Thank you!
   Thank you Danyella-if you would like to work there call Jackie in my office (NY).
   Cute boy, nice.
    Thanks Karlie!
 With proper thinking and leadership, we can have a much better plan than Obamacare - something that works for the people and costs much less
 Obamacare is far toooo expensive, far toooo complicated (thousands of pages) and, most importantly, doesn't work. WE CAN DO MUCH BETTER!
 Our country and it's leadership has to be so careful and so smart - these are treacherous times, like no other. The world is a crazy place!
 Iran is toying with our president - buying time and laughing at the stupidity of our leadership. Syria, and now this! What's next?
 Re negotiation: Know exactly what you want and keep it to yourself. Think about what the other side wants and where they're coming from.
 “Obstacles are those frightful things you see when you take your eyes off your goal.” - Henry Ford
 Don’t believe the manipulated job numbers. Walmart has just cut orders with suppliers because of rising inventory.
 Spanish version of ObamaCare website  delayed  Hitting google translate apparently too complicated. #MakeDCListen
 On Monday, ObamaCare kicks in with all goodies of 300% increased premiums, higher taxes and part-time replacement employees.
 Our country needs leadership now. There is total dysfunction in Washington.
 Five Star  are the most luxurious & elite residences in the Vegas market  “If you love it, own it”
 You have to believe in what you want. Keep your focus, keep your momentum--and remain patient and persistent.
 For all of those who have been asking about online sales, the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection ties & shirts are sold 
   Thanks and true!
 I am so happy that I was able to do something really good for the Bronx - and lots of jobs!
 Yes, this is a large scale version of when I built and saved the ice skating rink in Central Park (which all should go to). Great course!
   Good point, yes!
 Credit the Bloomberg administration for having the foresight and courage to get this decades old project finished - will be BIG for NY.
 To be called Trump Links at Ferry Point, course will be GREAT and, over the years, hold many tournaments and major championships-$'s to NYC.
 Once the Bloomberg administration selected Trump to take over the very expensive and years late project, I kicked "ass" and got it done fast
 The big golf course project on the water by the Whitestone Bridge in NYC that has been under construction for many years now complete-GREAT!
 “A very good way to pave your own way to success is simply to work hard and to be diligent” – Think Like a Champion
 7 million Americans are going to lose their jobs due to ObamaCare. 46 million face 300% premium increases. DEFUND! #MakeDCListen
 Both Obama administration and House leadership staffs are exempt from ObamaCare. Why not the American people? #MakeDCListen
 Winner of the 5 Star Diamond Award,  two courses grace over 600 acres on the Potomac River 
 ‘Uniforms 4 Everyone’ campaign  has a $3,000 goal to buy underprivileged kids school uniforms 
 Happy belated birthday wishes to  Barbara is terrific!
 Via  “ New York Unveils $50 Million Presidential Penthouse” 
 “Partner with people who share your values, attitude and drive.” – Midas Touch with 
 “The world is changing very fast. Big will not beat small anymore. It will be the fast beating the slow.” - 
  Happy Birthday!
 “Build confidence starting with small successes that lead to greater and greater successes--there is nothing like winning." -Think Big
 In real estate, all locations can be enhanced through good marketing. Be smart!
 ObamaCare will increase individual market premiums by 99% for men and 62% for women  DEFUND!! #MakeDCListen
 The shale boom is saving our economy  Good for jobs, national security & trade balance. Frack Now & Frack Fast!
 Via  by Cindy W. Hodnett: “Dorya to introduce Trump Home high-end furniture” 
 If ObamaCare is so amazing, then why is Obama delaying significant parts of the bill before the election? #MakeDCListen
 Obama wanted to meet with the Iranian president, yet the Iranians denied the request. So much for Hope & Change.
 Remember what I previously said--Obama will someday attack Iran in order to show how tough he is.
 Can you believe the head of Iran refused to meet with our great President?—Zero respect!
 If Justice Roberts had made the correct decision on ObamaCare, our country would not be in turmoil right now!
    NeNe asks me for advice and I am happy to oblige. Tonight at 9.00 on Bravo (and watch her ratings go through the roof!).
 “If winning isn't everything, why do they keep score?” - Vince Lombardi
 “Take the time to move yourself forward. In other words, think, work and be lucky.” – Think Like a Champion
 It’s a shame the ruling class of Republicans don’t attack Obama and the Democrats the way they hit Senators Cruz & Lee.
 Less than one week away from implementation, ObamaCare’s small business exchanges are not ready!  A disaster!
 Obama promised premiums would lower $2,500/yr for family of 4. In truth, healthcare will increase by $7,450 
 Obama told the UN that “the world is more stable than it was 5 years ago.” Is he delusional?
 Congrats to Team USA & Capt.  for retaining the PGA Cup! Well done and well deserved!
  Veteran Military Dogs campaign seeks to rehabilitate veteran K9s and find them a home 
 . seeks my advice on prenups, tonight at 9 PM on Bravo
  Thank you.
  is on a very triky and slippery path right now.The right moves will lead to greatness, the wrong moves to oblivion! GUIDANCE.
 I am a defender of  who I think is a good person (and not because she stays at my hotels), but last night's outfit must go!
                "I like Hilary Clinton. She is very admirable. But  is our nation's answer." Thanks.
 Huma should dump the sicko Weiner.  He is a calamity that is bringing her down with him.
 Obama’s coal regulations will destroy the coal industry, put Americans out of work, raise electricity prices & lead to blackouts.
 The Democrats in Congress don’t want ObamaCare for themselves or big businesses. So why are they forcing it on the American people?
 Americans nationwide have their premiums double and work hours decreased.  must do the right thing, stand strong & defund!
 “Here’s the truth, the gov't doesn’t shutdown”  via  All essential services continue.  Don't believe lies.
 Mariano Rivera is greatest closer of all time. A leader in the club house & an exceptional man. One of the best  in history.
 Penn Jillette shows his dark side in new crowdfunded film Director’s Cut   
 Congratulations to  on being named  Power Player of the Week. Ivanka is doing a great job w/ DC Post Office.
 Via  by  “Trump Power” 
 The Emmys are sooooo boring!  Terrible show. I'm going to watch football! I already know the winners. Good night.
 Is it the Neil Patrick Harris show or the Emmy Awards?How was he ever put in this position to start with? CRAZY!
 Referees are destroying the enjoyment of NFL games. Slowing down the fun. Big shots. Jets game is ridiculous!
 Big things going on today at Trump National-Westchester!
    Thanks.
    Really good, thanks M.
   Happy birthday!
   Thank you, it is great. You have real talent!
 Republicans must unite to defund Obamacare - it will drive our country into oblivion and, by the way, the healthcare is no good anyway!
 An important part of my (or anybody's) success is the ability to judge people. I believe that  is a really good person.
 “Our Constitution was made only for a moral & religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.”-- John Adams
 “One man with courage is a majority.” - Thomas Jefferson
 The Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, exclusively available  offers the finest style in menswear 
 Welcome to the new reality. 23,116,928 US households on food stamps  Obama's Hope & Change.
 Opening in 2016, Trump Tower Punta del Este will bring our signature luxury living to the sands of Playa Brava 
 If you include people who have left the work force, unemployment rate is 15%. Labor participation rate is lowest in 70 yrs.
   Thanks Cathy.
  Hi Lexxay.
 Americans by & large hate ObamaCare. They see Obama lied to get it passed. They see big business & gov’t got waivers. Defund!
 Congratulations to  on standing strong and tying government shutdown to defunding ObamaCare.
 Via  "Trump Winery President Nominated for Award by Wine Enthusiast Magazine"  Congrats 
   Yes, she is FANTASTIC!
 Move slowly, carefully --- and then strike like the fastest animal on the planet!
 President Obama must remember that the worst thing you can do in a deal is seem desperate to make it. Be cool, move slowly - and think! IRAN
 President Obama seems so fawning and desperate to make a deal with Iran that lots of bad results can occur. Be cool and be careful!
 . – don’t worry about Liam. You can do much better and you have plenty of time—remain strong!
 As a stockholder in Apple, they should get on with a larger screen iPhone as a supplement—immediately.
 My comments on a larger screen iPhone were in addition to existing unit, not a replacement. Screen should be 10% larger than Samsung.
    Amazing engineering accomplishment that does not make economic sense.
 Lightweight Schneiderman's suit was filed on a Saturday (unheard of) against a school with a 98% approval rating right after Obama meeting.
 Lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman meets with President Obama (who he told me "sucks" as a president), and quickly files a suit against me!
   Better get a large screen iPhone, and fast, or risk losing even more business. Samsung cannot believe you have not acted! DUMB!
 I cannot believe that Apple didn't come out with a larger screen IPhone. Samsung is stealing their business. STEVE JOBS IS SPINNING IN GRAVE
  Your not free, you'll never be free. You'll be back (if you ever left) because you can't help yourself!
  Yes.
    Send his info to my office.
    Great game last week, your team really needed you!
 Lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman is perhaps the most incompetent and least respected A.G. in the U.S. He is a total joke!
 Why is lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman allowed to ask for campaign contributions from my people during settlement negotiations?
 Lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman sued school with a 98% approval rating while billions in corruption goes unpunished. A total crook?
   #Defund Obamacare!
 Just returned from Trump Doral in Miami. Massive construction job. When completed will be the best resort in U.S. Blue Monster is amazing!
 “Becoming an entrepreneur is a personal-development program. If you grow personally, your business will grow.” – Midas Touch
 Everyone should calm down.  is going to do a great job as Batman.
 Video of my day at The Old Post Office- soon to be the most fabulous hotel! 
 There are great campaigns on   Be sure to take a look and donate to one today.
  Too early!
 . leadership should not be afraid of a government shutdown. They should be afraid of not defunding ObamaCare.
    Thanks Sean, keep up the good work!
 “Keep focusing on doing what you love, even if times are tough.” – Think Big
 “Success is getting what you want. Happiness is wanting what you get.” - Dale Carnegie
 The Costa Concordia shipwreck is a MONUMENT TO STUPIDITY but the uprighting of the ship is a MONUMENT TO GENIUS!
 American Exceptionalism and the Navy Yard shooting do not go hand in hand. Foreign countries, in particular Russia, are mocking the U.S.
 The Navy Yard shooting is a horrible disaster. If we don't clean up OUR COUNTRY of the garbage soon, we are just going to do a death spiral!
  has great ratings-I told you so. He should pay me at least 25% of his earnings because he would be nowhere without Donald Trump
 I am proud to announce our newest project, Trump Tower Mumbai. Together with the Lodha Group, it will be incredible! 
 Only 15 days until ObamaCare is implemented. Congress must waive the monstrosity for regular Americans. Why should they be punished?
 Michigan has made great progress under Snyder-Calley.  is out early energizing the grassroots. Keep it up! #JoinMITeam
 Bashar Assad is stronger today than he was before Obama threatened military action. Obama really bungled this.
 I predict that President Obama will at some point attack Iran in order to save face!
 Great column by David Bossie at  “A Battle Won but the War Continues to Defund ObamaCare” 
 Congrats to   on being awarded  the prestigious 'Eagle Award for Amnesty Reporting' 
 Congratulations to  on her successful first day as co-host of  Great to be in studio today for Elisabeth.
 I can’t believe my friend Derek Jeter is out for whole season--injured day he left Trump World Tower. Lucky bldg.-- Move back fast!
    You wedding at Trump National was one of the most beautiful I have ever seen - more importantly, an amazing couple!
   The judge who called the fight a draw should be thrown out of boxing-it wasn't even close. She is incompetent (or worse)
 When I say I would end Obamacare, I would also come up with a plan that would be far better, much easier to understand, and cost less!
   GREAT FIGHT FLOYD - YOU SHOWED THEM ALL ONCE AGAIN!
   My prediction of Floyd is looking good!
 New York Fashion Week is really bad, and used to be so glamorous and exciting! No stars, no fun-just boring. They need serious help. #NYFW
    Just remember, Arsenio wouldn't be back at all if it were not for Donald J. Trump - he admits that - he will do great!
 I truly hope President Obama doesn't do something irrational and dangerous for our country in order to save face. He must sit back and chill
 Obama is now warning North Korea on the Yongbyon nuclear reactor  After Syria, our enemies are laughing!
 Prayers go out to the victims of the terrible fire in New Jersey. Stay strong and remember it will soon get better.
   Mark - thanks for remembering.
    Great going, congrats!
   Thanks Jan!
 We should stop talking, stay out of Syria and other countries that hate us, rebuild our own country and make it strong and great again-USA!
 Most people do not know what Presient Obama is going to do to save his legacy. I do! He's got to get back to basics.Forget Syria-FIX THE USA
 Wow, with all this talk,  is going to Russia on November 9th- 
 “Trust your instincts, especially if they are well honed.” – Midas Touch
 My interview w/  Peter Cook re the Old Post Office Bldg becoming Trump Int'l Hotel, Washington D.C. 
 . manager Joe Girardi is a gritty leader who stands up for his players. Doing a great job!
 NO GAMES! HOUSE  MUST DEFUND OBAMACARE! IF THEY DON’T, THEN THEY OWN IT!
 Now Assad is demanding that Obama stop supporting the rebels before he turns over his chemical weapons. What a mess!
 China, Russia and Iran are laughing at us. We have weak leaders who are threatening our national security. Dangerous times.
 Must read piece by  “Obama's Diplomatic Acrobatics” 
 Named best golf course in the world by  Trump Int'l Golf Links Scotland is a 7,400 yd par 72 
 At least  is consistent. She takes over a magazine and it ends up in the gutter.
  is claiming that she decided to leave the  Sure, just like every other magazine that fired her.
 Tina Brown could finally be over.   is a total failure. She just got fired, great!
 I will be doing #GDNY Good Day N.Y. with Rosanna &Greg live at 8.30 A.M.  I will be giving money to a great guy who lost his son in the WTC.
 Putin's letter is a masterpiece for Russia and a disaster for the U.S. He is lecturing to our President.Never has our Country looked to weak
 “ I would like to extend my best wishes to all, even the haters and losers, on this special date, September 11th.”
   Never Give Up--How I turned my biggest challenges into success.
 “Take calculated risks. That is quite different from being rash.” - George S. Patton
 Why is oil at a record high? OPEC & the oil speculators continue to rip us off.
 Many people have asked recently "when do you sleep?"  The answer is -- not much.
  Thanks.
 A year ago today a diplomat and 3 security operatives were abandoned by our government while they were under attack.  Never forget!
 Donald Trump Jr., Ivanka Trump, Eric Trump, and myself in front of The Old Post Office, D.C. on Pennsylvania... 
 An ad hoc interview I filmed with a German journalist at Ground Zero hours after the attack 
 God bless all the brave souls who perished 12 years ago today.  You will never be forgotten!
 Via  “Donald, Ivanka Trump say DC’s Old Post Office Pavilion will be 1 of country’s finest hotels” 
   Thanks!
   Great!
                        " stayed in your Chicago hotel last night. Great staff and awesome room!" Thanks!
                          " Thank you for saving new york from another Spitzer era."  We got lucky!
 Obama must now start focusing on OUR COUNTRY, jobs, healthcare and all of our many problems. Forget Syria and make America great again!
 Putin is having such a good time. Our President is making him look like the genius of all geniuses. Do not fear,we are a NATION OF POTENTIAL
 I said that Eliot Spitzer was going to lose when he was way up in the polls. I fought him when others retreated out of fear. NEVER GIVE UP!
 Spitzer and Weiner lost, lightweight Eric Schneiderman will be next - he will be challenged in the PRIMARY. He has done a really poor job!
 I would like to extend my best wishes to all, even the haters and losers, on this special date, September 11th.
 Weiner is gone, Spitzer is gone - next will be lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman. Is he a crook? Wait and see, worse than Spitzer or Weiner
 Assad hit the jackpot!
 Back to work for the President to try and keep some dignity for the office and himself. The so-called rebels must be thoroughly confused!
 The only reason Obama gave a speech last night was because it was on the schedule-Putin is laughing and the reviews have been really bad!
 Lightweight Attorney General Eric Schneiderman will be next to lose. He goes after a school with a 98% approval rating,leaves biggies alone
 Lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman asked us for political contributions DURING his investigation of us,then sued for $40 million.Dopey guy!
 Thank you to all of my Twitter followers for helping to defeat Weiner and Spitzer. Remember, in the beginning they said it couldn't be done!
 I fought hard against Spitzer and Weiner, and both lost. For a while, when Spitzer was way up, it seemed that I was a lone voice! Good power
 Wow, Eliot Spitzer has lost - great news for New York City!
 Bottom line, I don't think President changed people's minds - must hope for a lifeline from Putin, a very dangerous lifeline at that!
 We will have to see what Russia's next move will be. They may have given him an out of an embarrassing situation or drove into deeper mess!
 He is working hard and for that he must be given credit!
 Doesn't want to remove Assad - worries what comes next.
 Making his case in a nice and articulate manner.
 Does he look sharp, smart and presidential-his hands keep hitting the podium, making a loud and distracting noise-microphone too sensitive.
 Here we go!
 Will be covering President Obama's speech at 9.00 on Twitter-you are all so lucky!
 Red line statement was a disaster for President Obama.
 This new Russian strategy guarantees victory for the Syrian government-and makes Obama and U.S. look hopelessly bad. President in trouble!
 The Russians are playing a very smart game. In the meantime they are buying lots of time for Syria and making U.S. look foolish. Dangerous!
                    " you are a great mentor. I have all your books"  Great--good luck!
    It will be great & produce many jobs.
 Danger-Weiner is a free man at 12:01AM. He will be back sexting with a vengeance. All women remain on alert.
 In order to stay competitive in your industry, it is imperative to keep up to date on all news. A great commodity is information.
   So true!
      Thank you.
                 "Cant wait to hear what  has to say about Obama's speech tonight!"I'll be tweeting during speech
 “MSNBC'S TOURÉ HAS EPIC RACE-BAITING MELTDOWN ON CNN”  It's Toure's modus operandi. He is so angry.
  Happy Birthday!
                       " when will u return to    Soon!
     Olivia=a total winner!
                  " Can you imagine Obama running his own business? How sad would that be?" You never know!
             "F.O.C.U.S. - Follow One Course Until Successful  -Midas Touch (this is a great read)" Thanks.
 Assad will never give up his chemical weapons. He has spent years and billions accumulating them. This is all a ruse.
 Want to take a quiz with me? Download the  app and watch  on Monday at 8/7c on 
 Obama and Kerry are bungling Syria by the hour. They have set America’s deterrence & stature back by years. Amateurs!
 For all of my millions of followers, and at your request, I will be tweeting tonight during President Obama’s speech!  9pm ET
 We deserve all the answers on Benghazi!  
 Soon to be the greatest hotel in U.S. don_trump_jr     #OldPostOffice 
 Press conference at The Old Post Office in D.C. 
 Just landed in D.C. 
 Heading down to D.C. 
 #TrumpVine from D.C.- 
 This George Zimmerman is really a mess - he really has to just disappear! (He attacked his wife last night).
    Arsenio, may your run be long, successful and important-just be yourself and you will be a smash! Good luck.
 I'll be going to the Old Post Office Building on Pennsylvania Avenue in D.C. today. Will create one of world's great hotels. Lots of jobs!
 Do you believe what is going on in Washington with respect to Syria - these people don't have a clue!
   He is not smart enough to understand!
   Why does a network allow a stupid racist like Toure to stay on the air when his ratings are so abysmal! Can there be only one reason
 Icahn, Kravis, Zell, Buffett have all used the bankrutcy law to their benefit. Many of the top business people do.
   Dumb as a rock Toure doesn't have a clue about money or anything else-merely a simpleton racist.Really bad ratings,really stupid guy
  If you weren't such a dumb racist moron with bad ratings you would know I never filed for bankruptcy,now worth over $10 billion dummy
 “It is hard to fail, but it is worse never to have tried to succeed.” -Theodore Roosevelt
 So much for ‘global warming.’ Earth is cooling at a record pace 
 Our economy is in trouble. The unemployed are more likely to drop out of the workforce than find a job. We need growth-- and now!
 Iraq has granted Iran full air rights to fly over and arm Syria. What did America accomplish with the Iraq war? And now Syria?!
 This week will mark the 1 year anniversary of the attack in Benghazi that left 4 Americans dead.  No answers!
 Now Obama has set red line 2 with demand that Assad hands over Syria’s chemical weapons or it will face an attack.
 Congratulations to  on her superb  win.  She is terrific!
 Downtown Manhattan’s trendiest hotel,  -- 46 stories of luxurious rooms, fine dining & The Spa 
 Adopt the Arts campaign at  ensures that an underfunded public school has music and arts programs 
  Ernie--You are doing a great job with #autismsupport--glad to help. See you at Trump National, Jupiter.
 #TheView Lots of fun on  with  and   
 Don't attack Syria - an attack that will bring nothing but trouble for the U.S. Focus on making our country strong and great again!
 Why are we fighting for the "rebels" that hate us-only to save face for Obama!
 Doing Fox & Friends at 7 A.M.
 Also, great comeback by the New York Jets. That game was over until a really dumb defensive play by Tampa. Amazing.
 Tony Romo just made a great play-Giants are getting killed!
 Great comeback by Tom Brady-New England!
 The New York Giants are looking really bad so far tonight. Does not get much worse than this!
 Doing a commercial for  lots of fun! 
    You need both, thanks.
 Do you notice that nobody is talking about the many scandals of the Obama administration anymore - The Teflon President!
  Great!
    Great looking couple-good to have him back!
 My shirts, ties and suits are selling great  because they are the best and most stylish at a really reasonable price - thanks!
   I want him to do a great job but he can't.
 President Obama, do not attack Syria. There is no upside and tremendous downside. Save your "powder" for another (and more important) day!
 Isn't it intetesting that anybody who attacks President Obama is considered a racist by the real racists out there!
 Speaking of our very stupid war with Iraq, it is totally disintegrating and Iran (with Russia) will walk in and take it over (lots of oil)!
   Thank you, but we are dealing with many very stupid people!
 I'm a Republican but not a fan of the last George Bush-he also was a lousy President (Iraq etc.). In fact, he was so bad he gave us Obama!
 Former President Jimmy Carter is so happy that he is no longer considered the worst President in the history of the United States!
 Syria has been given so much time that much of the things we were going to bomb have been moved into civilian areas! A polititian's war.
 Just watching NBC News where our potential attack is being detailed-the exact ships, the stealth bombers, the destinations-so ridiculous!
 If Syria was forced to use Obamacare they would self-destruct without a shot being fired. Obama should sell them that idea!
 When we have big disasters, no one comes to our aid or even suggests helping - but we are always expected to come to the aid of others!
 “Any political leader who won’t face the future head on is putting the American Dream at risk.” – The America We Deserve
 “Do you want to know who you are? Don't ask. Act! Action will delineate and define you.” -  Thomas Jefferson
 Obama is not a leader, he's just a campaigner!
 Many of the Syrian rebels are radical jihadi Islamists who are murdering Christians. Why would we ever fight with them?
 Via  by Hannah Sampson: “BLT Prime coming to Trump’s Doral resort” 
 No surprise. Woman being cited by Kerry & McCain on Syrian rebels is a paid consultant of the rebels 
 The historic $250M renovations at  are moving on pace. Once complete,  will be South Florida’s premiere resort.
 “Remember the golden rule of negotiating: ‘He who has the gold makes the rules.’” – Midas Touch
 I am not angry at Russia (or China) because their leaders are far smarter than ours. We need real leadership, and fast,before it is too late
 I wonder how much our "leaders" have promised, or given, Russia in order for them to behave and not make the U.S. look even worse?
 Really bad news just announced concerning jobs. Far fewer jobs created in August than anticipated. Interest rates, therefore, to remain low.
 We don't have the leadership, including the Generals (who just said the element of surprise does not matter) to attack anyone! Cool it.
 Did you ever see a situation so ridiculous as our President explaining what, when and where to Congress about a Syrian attack. Far too late!
 The terrorists in Syria are calling themselves REBELS and getting away with it because our leaders are so         completely stupid!
 We should not attack Syria but if they make the stupid move to do so, the Arab League,whose members are laughing at us, should pay!
 “If you plan for the worst – if you can live with the worst – the good will always take care of itself.” – The Art of the Deal
 ... while a 300ft turbine in Ardrossan, North Ayrshire, erupted in flames the previous month during gales of 165 mph 
 In January '12, 3 turbines were wrecked in rough weather ... 
 Russia is sending a fleet of ships to the Mediterranean. Obama’s war in Syria has the potential to widen into a worldwide conflict.
 A 40mph gust of wind wrecked a wind turbine in Scotland  Any turbine in close proximity to a school must go!
 All former Bush administration officials should have zero standing on Syria. Iraq was a waste of blood & treasure.
 Must read via  by  “Congress Should Vote No on Syria” 
 If President Obama was going to attack Syria, he should’ve done it a long time ago as a surprise & not after (cont) 
 That would mean that Eliot Spitzer has failed at everything he's done--politics, TV & even real (cont) 
 It will be interesting to see what happens to Eliot Spitzer if he loses the election for Comptroller to very capable 
 I have just lost my beautiful & elegant long time exec. assistant  Norma Foerderer. She passed away yesterday – a truly magnificent woman.
 AGAIN, TO OUR VERY FOOLISH LEADER, DO NOT ATTACK SYRIA - IF YOU DO MANY VERY BAD THINGS WILL HAPPEN & FROM THAT FIGHT THE U.S. GETS NOTHING!
 While everyone is waiting and prepared for us to attack Syria, maybe we should knock the hell out of Iran and their nuclear capabilities?
 If you look at the horrible picture on the front page of the NY Times of the "rebels" executing prisoners, you would say forget the rebels!
 Tell Congress to straighten out the many problems of our country before trying to be the policemen to the world. Make America great again!
 The only reason President Obama wants to attack Syria is to save face over his very dumb RED LINE statement. Do NOT attack Syria,fix U.S.A.
 President Obama put himself in a very bad position when he talked about Syria crossing the RED LINE. Amazingly, now he denies he said that!
    Thank you.
  Very true!
 Is Anthony Weiner a jerk or what!
 Jay Leno and his people are constantly calling me to go on his show. My answer is always no because his show sucks. They love my ratings!
   Send it to me in New York, Doug!  Thanks.
 “Appreciate your property, and your property will appreciate for you.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 I hear this moron  said nasty things about me (hair etc—boring) on the terminated  show. Stupid guy/bad ratings!
 I’ve always defended  but he never defends me. He's not a loyal person & I now understand why everybody dumped him. Jay sucks!
 “To keep momentum, keep challenging yourself.” – Think Big
 With the signature services of Trump Attaché,  brings premiere luxury to the white sands of Waikiki 
   Thanks.
  Thanks.
 Happy New Year to all of my Jewish friends and supporters. Shana Tova. Hopefully it will be a great year!
 . must stay focused on defunding ObamaCare and the impending budget battle. Don’t let Syria rule the agenda.
 . had a flawless  quarterfinal win last night. She’s a great player and a wonderful person.
 Many Syrian ‘rebels’ are radical Jihadis. Not our friends & supporting them doesn't serve our national interest. Stay out of Syria!
 . book "Emily Gets Her Gun" exposes the attack on our Second Amendment  A must read!
 Congratulations to  on winning  TV Personality Of The Year. Piers deserves his success!
   Thanks.
  Soon.
                    " To be a champ. you have to believe in yourself when nobody else will"  True!
 For all of those fools that want to attack Syria, the U.S.has lost the vital element of surprise-so stupid-could be a disaster!
 What I am saying is stay out of Syria.
 The great GENERALS MacArthur and Patton, real leaders and fighters, are spinning in their graves as we give Syria info & time to prepare.
 From the great author of Rich Dad, Poor Dad-- Robert Kiyosaki-- here is a very nice article. 
 “Representing your own brand yourself is the best way to go. If you can’t sell it, who will?” – Midas Touch
 Elections have consequences. Obama just published “final regulations for ObamaCare’s individual mandate”  Enjoy!
   Great!
   Thanks.
 How can General Martin Dempsey tell Obama that delaying the Syria bombardment will have no consequences? He is no Patton or MacArthur.
 “A big key to winning is knowing where the other side is coming from.” – Think Like a Champion
 I am giving away money. Check the crowdfunding site   Raise money for anything!
 China, OPEC and Russia laugh at us. But now thanks to Obama so does Syria. Very sad!
 Enjoy the ratings of President Obama. 
 I applaud Columbia, South Carolina for cleaning up biz center  Will cut crime & advance commerce.
 President Obama's "Arab Spring" is not looking so good right now!
 Think of it, the Arab League doesn't want to get involved with Syria - but they want us to do their dirty work. How stupid!
 If the U.S. attacks Syria and hits the wrong targets, killing civilians, there will be worldwide hell to pay. Stay away and fix broken U.S.
 Our country is looking very bad right now!
    After Arsenio won Celebrity Apprentice he told me, in tears, that I would be his first guest if he got a show. No interest!
 Eliot Spitzer has failed at everything he has ever done, and now he wants to be comptroller. Thrown out of politics and off of TV, CRAZY!
 Each time I see one of Anthony Weiner's television ads for mayor I ask, what the hell is he doing just wasting money & time-go get a job!
   Thanks!
 In war, the elememt of surprise is sooooo important.What the hell is Obama doing.
 We have given Syria so much time and information-there has never been such an instance in wartime history. Syria is now fully prepared!
 Why isn't the Arab League paying for everything and sending troops? They want us to do their dirty work with no involvement by themselves!
 The Arab League stated that it wants nothing to do with an attack on Syria, but they want us to attack.Are our leaders insane or just stupid
 It is truly amateur hour at the White House - and this is why we should not be doing the "war thing" right now!
    So true!
 President Obama's weakness and indecision may have saved us from doing a horrible and very costly (in more ways than money) attack on Syria!
    Good luck.
   You have real talent!
   Happy birthday.
  Thank you.
 Did anyone notice that Obama failed to get a coalition of other countries to go along with us. He couldn't even get Britain! NO LEADERSHIP.
    Thank you.
 Be prepared, there is a small chance that our horrendous leadership could unknowingly lead us into World War III.
 China is already preparing to benefit economically from this mess. They will pick up the pieces and make yet another fortune-& laugh at us!
 Obama now just wants to save face, Russia is now telling him "don't do it". He waited too long and the other side is much better prepared.
 Who are our generals that are allowing this fiasco to happen right before our eyes. Call it the "PLENTY OF NOTICE WAR"
 Syria has prepared for an attack based on all of our "talk" - they have moved targeted ammunition and supplies to new locations.Amazing!
 For the first time in the history of military operations a country has broadcast what, when and where they will be doing in a future attack!
 The President must get Congressional approval before attacking Syria-big mistake if he does not!
 How bad has our "leader" made us look on Syria. Stay out of Syria, we don't have the leadership to win wars or even strategize.
 If Obama attacks Syria and innocent civilians are hurt and killed, he and the U.S. will look very bad!
 Is everyone seeing how incompetently our country is being run by watching the mess with Syria? Our leaders don't know what they are doing!
 The ratings of The Cycle on MSNBC, a sad and pathetic show, are way down. If they fired racist moron  a truly stupid guy, they live!
  Happy Birthday Deborah.
 Dress for success. The Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, exclusively available  
 Pervert Weiner is dead in his race for mayor of NYC but WOW, Eliot Spitzer has dropped way down in recent poll for comptroller. SLEAZE!
 So, a woman in Chicago, who never had a job, has 9 kids with 7 different men (she is one of many). These kids will never work. Trouble!
   So true!
   Interesting and thanks!
   Thanks Ben.
   I agree, thanks.
 I hope everyone read the brilliant article in American Spectator about leightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman. He should be run out of office!
 In that  has  with really dumb racist  Bryant Gumbel(and I mean dumb), and no CBS (which fired Bryant), I am switching bldgs.
 People are really liking the new ties and shirts  are amazing and selling great!
 “Sometimes you have to take a half step back to take two forward.” - 
 Via  by Lauren Odomirok: "Trump, Norman play renovated golf course" 
 #TrumpVine A message for my hotel guest,  
      Thanks Dan.
  True.
  Thanks.
 What a shame that  ratings have sunk even lower in 2013. Prime time down 50%.  are (cont) 
 What will we get for bombing Syria besides more debt and a possible long term conflict? Obama needs Congressional approval.
 Congress must protect our borders first. Amnesty should be done only if the border is secure and illegal immigration has stopped.
 Thx Mark--I appreciate your words about the school. You sound like you're doing well--happy for you.  
                       "  Remember Obama so loved the poor he created millions more!" Interesting!
   Thanks!
                     " remembering your generosity to so many after #SuperstormSandy." Thank you Marlena.
 If Christian Bale turned down $50M to return as Batman he should have his head examined. What was he thinking?!
 The Yankees are sure lucky George Steinbrenner is not around. A lot of people would be losing their jobs.
 Via  by Jeffrey Lord: "Is Eric Schneiderman a Crook?"  What a great writer & researcher--amazing story. 
 Wow,  ratings are really low, worst in many years. I guess I'll have to start doing my Tuesday morning interviews with them again!
   Tanja--never give up!
 The United States needs to fix its own problems, of which there are many, first!
 Let the Arab League take care of Syria. Why are these rich Arab countries not paying us for the tremendous cost of such an attack?
 If we are going to continue to be stupid and go into Syria (watch Russia), as they say in the movies, SHOOT FIRST AND TALK LATER!
 I wonder what the great generals like Patton, the big M, or Robert E. LEE would have thought about our stupid broadcasting of an attack?
    No, dopey, I would not go into Syria, but if I did it would be by surprise and not blurted all over the media like fools.
 That said, the rich Arab countries should get involved with the Syrian mess, not us.We should start rebuilding our own country & military.
 Why do we keep broadcasting when we are going to attack Syria. Why can't we just be quiet and, if we attack at all, catch them by surprise?
 I give the President's speech a 7 on the scale of 0 to 10! Not bad but room for improvement!
 Why would anyone think Obama would attack Syria the day of his speech in Washington. He doesn't want to detract from his press & glory.
   So true, not even close.
  Have the Arab League do it and pay for it.
  Thanks.
   I will!
                       "I really want  to speak at Liberty University convocation again." Great school.
   Thanks La Toya!
  Happy Birthday Bernice.
   True.
              " Trump will win this - as he wins everything else! Awesome"  Thanks.
 Do not settle for remaining in your comfort zone. Being complacent is a good way to get nowhere. Take control and move forward every day.
 . and  discussing my case on  
 “You owe it to yourself and to your community to make your property the best it can be.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 The misery of Obama’s economic policies. US households with unemployed parent was at record high in 2011 
 Remember, all these ‘freedom fighters’ in Syria want to fly planes into our buildings.
 Congratulations to  on ‘The Liberty Amendments’ debuting at #1 on the NY Times’ bestseller list. Must read!
 Congrats to  on making  first cut. Stay strong and positive! We are all rooting for you.
                         2013|Josh8J4                    " I have a dream that you will be president to make this country great again. #USA" Thank you.
 Young entrepreneurs – in an economic climate like this only the strong survive. You can do it. Think Big!
 Watch  FoxNews’   & former prosecutor Doug Burns destroy ridiculous lawsuit 
 Via  WSOC_TV: “Blair Miller talks with Donald Trump about Charlotte ventures” 
 Be sure to check out  uploads of  very successful 2013  summit 
  Interesting.
                   "  the Arab league should be taking care of this, not us."  100% correct
                       " At least Doral will be great again!!!"  That's true!
   Great!
  Thanks Terry.
   Thanks Peter.
 I have a dream that our country will be great again! #DreamDay
    Thanks for your support - I greatly enjoyed your comments on The Five the other day. Best wishes!
 As I predicted long ago, the war in Iraq was a disaster for the U.S. Heading for civil war, there are bombings all over the place.Iran happy
 Via  " Talks Hamptons Lifestyle with Emmy Rossum" 
 Kate is donating a #kidney to her husband  .  You can help! I did  #donate
 . legal analyst & former prosecutor  destroyed hack Schneiderman’s suit on  yesterday.She’s very sharp!
 See  on the cover of  View the digital edition: 
 There has been a systematic targeting of the Tea Party by the Obama administration. Now Schneiderman goes after me. No coincidence.
 The lightweight hack Schneiderman told Ivanka that the “case is weak" and more.  Meets with Obama & then files one day later.
 Has AG Schneiderman been extorting his targets and their lawyers for contributions? We will find out.
   Very cool, thanks.
   Thanks.
                     " purely a political move if he met w/Obama,Mr.Trump please put the heat on this clown show!"
 I hope the NY tax payer appreciates the millions Schneiderman is about to waste on a small case. I will litigate to victory.
 See Schneiderman admit he spoke with Obama about “ongoing investigations." 
 Thug Politics. Lightweight hack Schneiderman meets with Obama on Thursday, then brings frivolous suit on Saturday.
   Thank you.
 My  int. destroying Schneiderman’s frivolous suit which he brought after meeting Obama on Thurs. 
 Via  "Trump: Attorney general behind lawsuit a 'total lightweight'" 
 Via  by Jeffrey Lord: “New Obama Scandal Erupts: Trump Targeted” 
   Interesting!
   I don't think he can!
 Via  "Trump’s new course plans on display" 
 Why isn’t AG Schneiderman going after Democrat Jon Corzine and the $1.4 billion that is “missing?”
 Amazing! AG Schneiderman sues a school w/ a 98% approval rating but doesn’t go after billion $ fraudsters all over Wall St.
 I really enjoyed doing the show circuit this AM discussing lightweight AG Eric Schneiderman & the terrible job he has done for NY.
 Gov. Cuomo's Moreland Comm should be looking at AG Schneiderman shaking down those under investigation/ in litigation for campaign $$$
 Fox and Friends
 Wow, l just found out that A.G. Schneiderman met with President Obama in Syracuse on Thursday --- and sued me on Saturday! Same as IRS etc.
 What did our very stupid & ineffective A.G. Eric Schneidean, during his trips to MY office, tell me about President Obama & Governor Cuomo?
 After years of long stops then starts, why did dopey Eric Scheiderman tell people in The Trump Org. "this case is going away,we have no case
 How can an Attorney General ask for campaign contributions during his evaluation of a case - a total sleazebag!
 Why did lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman come to my office on numerous occasions begging for campaign contributions? Also, recent asks?
 Why is it that Eric Schneiderman is considered a lightweight by so many and has failed to go after Jon Corzine and big abusers for billions?
 Why did failing A.G. Eric Schneiderman, after years of looking, file his pathetic lawsuit on a SATURDAY afternoon (unheard of)? No case!
 Lightweight A.G. Eric Schneiderman, who has been a total failure in office, failed to report the 98% approval rating of students for courses
    Thank you.
 Lightweight NYS Attorney General Eric Schneiderman is trying to extort me with a civil law suit. See website 
   Thanks, it was fun and amazing!
    Sir Nick is not only a great player, he is a great guy -and, by the way, doing a fantastic job for CBS!
   Happy birthday!
 For all of those who have been asking about online sales, the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection ties & shirts are sold 
 #FlashbackFriday Trump family- final week of  show-  is terrific! 
    Great Jason!
  Thanks!
           "   What a great building Mr T!"  Thanks!
 Anyway, I’m all about jobs & the economy & making America great again. We’re falling fast!
 John McCain couldn’t get him to release “it” and neither could Hillary Clinton—but Donald did!
 People should be proud of the fact that I got Obama to release his birth certificate, which in a recent book he “miraculously” found.
 Why are people upset w/ me over Pres Obama’s birth certificate?I got him to release it, or whatever it was, when nobody else could!
 “To keep your momentum going you must have intrinsic values as well as monetary values. Know when to give back.” – Think Big
 With the whacko pervert Weiner about to be embarrassed, all women need to be on the lookout. Sexting begins 9.11  12:01 AM
    Thanks!
 If Stop & Frisk is struck down by the pandering NYC politicians, increases in crime & eventual terrorist attacks will be on them.
   Thanks.
   Thanks, great that you remember, really nice.
    Thanks!
 Time flies it’s  30th anniversary. To celebrate we made this video highlighting its amazing history- 
  I like you too.
  Thanks!
 One of Obama’s greatest failures will be his legacy of making millions completely dependent on government handouts, not work.
 Via  by  "TRUMP: NY MAG AILES STORY 'TOTAL BULLS**T'"   It was total bullshit!
 Via  "Images of Donald Trump’s 2nd North-east golf course released: Public have say on images" 
 Re Miss Universe Pageant, we’ve spoken w/the LGBT community in Russia who asked “please don’t leave, it would send the wrong signal.”
  Thank you John.
  Roger Ailes never called me about your piece on him Gabriel. He is a very smart and secure guy who doesn't need help from me
 “Leadership is perhaps the key to getting any job done.” – The Art of The Deal
 With Democrats Spitzer, Danger-Weiner & Filner, which party really has the war on women?
   Happy Birthday!
 It’s Wednesday.  How many times will A-Rod sue the  today?  A-Rod has no one to blame but himself for his predicament.
 Congress must defund ObamaCare.  It is destroying Medicare and breaking promises to our Seniors, including veterans.
 .  Heatwave in Scotland makes wind turbines useless. Big problem, expensive mess.
 NYC politicians better stop pandering--ending stop & frisk would be a disaster. 
               "  ..why the animosity towards Bryant Gumbel?" He is a very stupid & arrogant dope!
           "  I bet her ratings were great! Good work Mr. Trump" They were great--thanks!
   And so have many others.
 Glad to see that the Egyptian Army is releasing Mubarek. As we see, Obama never should have abandoned him. He was an ally.
 Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach is one of the most exclusive & elite clubs in the world w/award winning amenities 
 Via  by Ann-Marie Parry: "Plans revealed for course named after Trump’s mother" 
 Had a great time on  last night.  Greta always does great interviews.
 The hatchet job in  about Roger Ailes is total bullshit. He is the ultimate winner who is surrounded by a great team. 
 . If a country wants to rapidly destroy its economy, I have an idea--just put up subsidized wind (cont) 
 You must admit that Bryant Gumbel is one of the dumbest racists around - an arrogant dope with no talent. Failed at CBS etc-why still on TV?
 GRETA IN A FEW MINUTES-on Fox.
  .Doing Greta tonight at 10 on Fox-enjoy!
  True--thanks!
   Mitt, but Stuart Stevens was terrible.
 “I have a very strict gun control policy: if there's a gun around, I want to be in control of it.” -  Clint Eastwood
 I will be doing Greta Van Susteren  tonight at 10 PM on Fox News, talking about China & Mitt's failed campaign team.
 ObamaCare is an absolute disaster which will destroy 16% of the economy and ultimately more!
 It’s Tuesday.  How many terrible predictions and advice will Karl 1.6% Rove make today?
 NYC is under constant threat from Jihadists & violent criminals. Stop & Frisk keeps streets & subways safe.Stand strong Ray Kelly
 Our country needs to reestablish the work ethic. In NY, welfare pays better than jobs  Zero incentive.
 . did a horrible job for Mitt—is a refund in order? Sadly, Stuart is a disaster!
 With  expected to represent  in the Presidential race, Chris will have a very hard time winning.
 . As someone well versed in job creation and the Private Sector, if you lie on your resume, You’re Fired!
 Our great project in South America, Trump Tower Punta Del Este in Uruguay, will have spectacular views and the... 
 Chicago is a shooting disaster-they should immediately go to STOP AND FRISK. They have no choice, hundreds of lives would be saved!
    Thank you.
    Thanks
    Interesting!
  Thanks!
  So true!
  Great place- thanks!
  Thanks!
  Thanks!
 “Tomorrow hopes we have learned something from yesterday.” - John Wayne
 Obama’s own gun study proves gun control is ineffective  
 . Commissioner Ray Kelly has done a top job keeping NYC safe. Stop & Frisk has been a critical tool for the NYPD.
 Be sure to check  to see my picks 
 #TrumpAdvice 
 #TrumpVine Opinion on Egypt- 
    Very cute!
 So, lets get this right. Steve Jobs dies and leaves his wife everything-billions of dollars. Now his wife has a boyfriend (lover). Oh Steve!
 Re-build the United.States not places that hate our country and everything we stand for!
 Let the Arab countries take care of Egypt-they have more to gain and plenty of money..It's time for the U.S. to stop being stupid.NO DOLLARS
  Yes, at Macy's.
 We must leave "stop and frisk" for A-Rod and Anthony Weiner!
 For all of those who have been asking about online sales, the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection ties & shirts are sold 
 “Develop success from failures. Discouragement and failure are two of the surest stepping stones to success.” – Dale Carnegie
 Keep an open mind--business is a creative endeavor. Strive for innovative ideas.
 See problems as a mind exercise. Enjoy the challenge---and remember to keep focused on your goals.
   Work hard, study, read 'The Art of the Deal' and  "Midas Touch"
 My motto is: ‘Never give up.’ I follow this very strictly. I do not let problems and challenges stop me; they are normal.
 Obama' ststement on Egypt was terrible and dumb-now being used by military as a rallying cry-our foreign policy is worst in U.S. history.
 Can’t wait for  follow up  piece discussing my large Sunday news shows ratings win because of my interview!
 NIELSEN RATINGS: 1. 2.52 viewers, 6 SHR,1.91RTG, .55 25-54  2. 2.24 total viewers, 5 SHR,1.61RTG, .47 25-54
 My interview with  w/ destroyed all Sunday competition w/ 2.52M total viewers…that’s why they want me on!
 .  See photo 
 Myself with mother and father at New York Military Academy. See, I can be very military. High rank!… 
 “Good communicators control space.” – Roger Ailes, ‘You Are The Message,’
 My  int. with  on my Iowa  speech,  2016 & Benghazi 
  Thanks.
 . HOUSE LEADERSHIP – ESTABLISH SELECT COMMITTEE ON BENGHAZI. THERE IS A MASSIVE COVERUP.
    Thanks.
                  " may not agree with your political stance, but your golf courses are unreal"  Thx (I think)
    Great!
   So nice, thanks!
   Thanks Amie.
 Fact: without Texas and states reaping the fracking boom, Obama’s job record would go from bad to worse!
 Mark Levin's  'The Liberty Amendments: Restoring the American Republic" is a truly great & important book.
   Who knows?
   Thanks Kelsey.
   Thanks.
    Thanks Dan.
 740 Park Avenue is being robbed all over the place--we come down hard on thieves at Trump buildings.
 #TrumpVine Where is the money  
                " Just finished #TheArtOfTheDeal.  Awesome book w/ great insight!" Thanks, good luck.
   Midas Touch, by Donald J. Trump & 
   Very nice, thanks.
    Carl, keep lt going, I have a lot of Apple stock. Push them to QUICKLY come out with a larger screen for the I-PHone (Samsung)
   My honor, thanks!
   Thanks!
  Thanks!
    Thanks!
    Great!
    Once again, it is time to let all time hits leader Pete Rose into the Baseball Hall of Fame. He has paid a big price!
    Great picture, say hello!
 Things happen that make you question whether you should keep going. As long as you are enjoying what you are doing, keep going.
 Congrats  on #RoadHard raising $1M on  a record.
 In Miami tracking  $250M renovations. Will be America's top resort.  just signed for 10 yr ext. 
 Don’t be easily pleased with yourself or with anything else. Be tough & fight to keep your standards high. -Think Like a Champion
  Great, good luck!
 “When your brand begins to build, you too will be faced with opportunities for greater recognition.” – Midas Touch
 Republicans have very strong hand in their fight against Obamacare-lets see if they are willing and able to play it "tuff"!
 Looks like Anthony Weiner Is through-most recent poll has him deeply in last place. GOOD NEWS
 “If it doesn't sell, it isn't creative.” - David Ogilvy
 More on Benghazi cover up: “ATTORNEY FOR WHISTLEBLOWER: 400 U.S. MISSILES STOLEN IN BENGHAZI”   Really bad.
 Obama has exempted businesses, his staff and all of Congress from ObamaCare.  Why is he still forcing the monstrosity on the U.S.?
 I will be on Greta  tonight at 10 PM on Fox News.
 Re  TimeWarner, I am going to be switching many of my buildings to another service—this is ridiculous!
 I missed the PGA Championship because it was not broadcast by TimeWarner  Why aren’t they giving subscribers major discounts?
 . refuted every point Karl 1.6% Rove made on the need to defund ObamaCare.Must listen  
 The Patch, a total loser for  will be a good deal compared to   laughs at “stupid” Armstrong!
 Congrats to  of   for exposing Jason Linkins of  as a lightweight dope who gives false information.
   Wow, good competition!
 Still a buyer’s market but somewhat fragile.  Be sure to calculate the risk of rising rates coming sooner than you think!
 . is the Windy City's sole skyscraper to feature a 4 star hotel, 4 star restaurant & spa 
    I agree-- is going down with  and Patch &  hates Tim Armstrong.
                  " Are your ties available in South Africa?"  You can order them online 
  Thanks.
    So true! Just a business tool used by the best! Ask Carl, Warren, etc.
     Deal done--too late dopey!
           " I'm so happy that you find time to tweet. I really enjoy following you."  Thanks Amy.
                   " hay Mr. Trump! You're my rolemodel,and I love your show(Celebrity Apprentice)"  Thanks!
   Thanks.
 Good.morning, I'm going to work!
 Not only is  a racist (and boring), he's a really dumb guy!
  I would love to represent your husband-you would end up with nothing! And please don't call Tim Armstrong stupid and weak?
 Did the poor but smart to leave ex-husband of  get any of the dollars she got for the use of his name in really stupid AOL deal?
 The failing  and dopey  are writing so much false junk about me-they just can't get enough!  BE CAREFUL.
            " I love all your inspirational quotes! It keeps us going... thanks Donald!" Great!
   He knows the best place!
  A long time ago, thanks.
  I understand, thanks.
 Thank you Readers' Choice: Trump Int'l Hotel Las Vegas has been nominated by 10 Best for "Best Pet-Friendly Hotel" 
                      " my 19 year old son, Logan, is hoping you run in 2016. Me too!" Thank you Logan and Erin.
               " you have my vote! ★★★★★"  Thanks.
   Thanks.
  So true--thanks.
 Congratulations to  on winning the PGA championship. Great job!
 “Money may not grow on trees, but it does grow from talent, hard work, and brains.” – Think Like a Billionaire
    Thank you!
 I can't believe that in New York we can't watch the PGA Championsip on CBS. How    .much discount is Time Warner giving its customers?
  - very fair interview!
    So nice, good morning!
   Thank you, I had an amazing time!
   Don't lie, you will watch with great gusto!
   My finances have been totally filed dummy!
   I already released them you moron!
    It was great being with you last night - fantastic people, and Bob V is special!!!
   Should be interesting - lets see how fair and honest they will be! Enjoy
    I enjoyed my intetview with  only hope it is fairly edited!
  interviews me on This Week during which time he stated that he was "pretty sure" President Obama was born in the U.S. Bad question!
    Very interesting!!!
    Thanks Thomas!
  Stay tuned!
 Big crowd expected tomorrow night in Iowa. It will be interesting and fun - great people!
 “Watch what people are cynical about, and one can often discover what they lack.” -      General George S. Patton
 Eliot had a terrible debate performance this morning against Scott Stringer. He can’t spin his failing and contemptible public record.
 The Trump Signature Collection, exclusively available at  is the pinnacle of style and prestige 
 Thank you  for putting my Scotland course on your cover and a Top 100 course in the world. 
 Colin Montgomerie  You are not only a great golfer, you are doing a great job of commentary 
 First Minister  will be destroying the beauty of Scotland with his insane desire for bird killing wind turbines.
 . is making a truly stupid mistake by forcing ugly industrial wind turbines down Scotland’s throat –he's hated for it.
 If the gov't shuts down, it is because Obama wants to make working Americans buy ObamaCare while businesses and gov't are exempt.
 If FM  needs to litter Scotland w/ ugly industrial wind turbines to gain independence, he will lose! 
 FACT – the reason why Americans have to worry about a government shutdown is because Obama refuses to pass a budget.
 Re: hiring contractors, remember the cheapest isn't always the best. Their work may have to be redone & they may not be reliable.
 In the latest poll, Danger-Weiner’s numbers have sunk. I wonder how Carlos handled the stress? He is one whacko sicko sexter.
 I will be addressing a fantastic Ames crowd at tomorrow's   Leadership Summit 
 .  Really solid playing--keep going!
 . Great playing--we are proud of you!
 Via  "Iowa Evangelical Leader Says Donald Trump Is Bold And Transparent" 
 Blackdog, Scotland, started a petition against  
   Thanks.
    When we finish, it will be one of world's great hotels.
                "Made sure to visit  during our 1st vacation to NYC. Well done   Thanks.
    Only some!
                     "  money solves all problems #momoneymoproblems" Wrong!
 Sleepy eyes  when looking at my financial filings, should’ve said “Great job Mr. Trump, Sir.”
 Doesn’t dummy  realize that when I considered running for president, I filed financial papers showing unbelievable numbers.
 Sleepy eyes  of the dumbest voices in politics-- is angry that I’m doing 
                  "  Biggest motivation and THEE best role models ever!"  Bill is a terrific guy!
  He should meet him & beat him--but that doesn't look like it's going to happen.
    Wrong, Piers is smart & tough and, when you get to know him, a really good guy--and loyal!
 Obama should meet with Putin snd convince him to do what is good for the U.S.  It's called good dealmaking or, simply, leadership! Cajole.
    Thanks
    66
   Thanks.
    Thanks.
    Have a great time-happy birthday!
    Thanks.
  Have a Happy Birthday.
    So true-Alex Salmond is absolutely killing these great and brave people!
 For all of those who have been asking about online sales, the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection ties & shirts are sold 
 Being true to yourself equals being true to your brand.That’s the solid foundation that will keep your brand flourishing. -Midas Touch
 Just a few days until I keynote at   Leadership Summit in Iowa  Very exciting
 “It’s a good idea to take your own pulse once in a while instead of focusing on what the masses are doing.” – Think Like a Champion
           " England Loves Donald Trump. Where can we buy your ties from over here please?" Check out 
  Great, go get 'em!
   Because Piers won Celebrity Apprentice & is wonderful--and I just started with Twitter.
                 "Hey  visited Trump International Hotel in #Vegas yesterday. What a fantastic hotel." Thanks!
    Great!
    Thank you!
 “Definiteness of purpose is the starting point of all achievement.” - W. Clement Stone
  Thanks.
  Keep your chin up, keep going.
      Thank you.
  Good luck!
   My honor!
 Do not underestimate yourself, and know you are able to handle what comes your way by increasing your leverage.
 Ft. Hood Jihadi Nidal Hassan has been paid over $300g in Army salary while on trial. His victims are deprived of any benefits...
 . 2013 dwindling sales continue to sink at an even faster record rate under Graydon Carter  Disaster!
   Thanks Ian.
  Great being on your show--see you soon!
   Thanks!
   Thank you.
 . features a striking glass walled building w/ loft inspired interiors   NYC's trendiest luxury  hotel
 The Trump Organization is honored to have been awarded the redevelopment of The Old Post Office. Will be DC's finest hotel.
 Excited to be keynoting   Leadership Summit in Iowa this Saturday 
   Happy Birthday Shane.
 #TrumpVine Weiner is a joke.... 
  HI!
    HI!
 Let  in the HOF - it's time!
  Good luck again!
   Happy birthday!
  Best to look up titles at  under publications. Start with The Art of the Deal and Never Give Up.
  If you love what you're doing, the energy and passion will be there. It's the best way to succeed.
   Yes, it will be amazing.
  Thank you Brian and good luck.
 “Be tough, be smart, be personable, but don’t take things personally. That’s good business.” – Think Like a Champion
 “I’ve found that people work harder when they are held accountable, and their confidence rises along with that.” – Midas Touch
  Thanks!
   Then why do you follow me like a little puppy, moron?
 Sharks are last on my list - other than perhaps the losers and haters of the World!
 Sorry folks, I'm just not a fan of sharks - and don't worry, they will be around long after we are gone.
 Leaving Miami-Trump National Doral will be GREAT!
    So true!
 Our trade deficit just jumped in May to “the second-highest level on record”   FAIR trade, not free trade. I TOLD YOU.
 Obama-Putin Moscow meeting on 9.3-4  On the agenda, 2013 Trump  Pageant in Moscow on 11.9, on 
 Stop and frisk works.  Instead of criticizing  Chief Ray Kelly, New Yorkers should be thanking him for keeping NY safe.
 In 2011 I said that Mubarak never should have been ousted because whoever replaces him will be worse.  Obama made a mistake.
 Via  "Trump’s links getting green" 
  You're right, it's beautiful--thanks!
 I just arrived in Miami where I will be checking out construction of the brand new Trump National Doral - always closely watch construction!
 Nice article on Trump Links at Ferry Point in today's New York Post - the construction is going really well!
 He would be crazy to play in L.A. - really bad coach who can't adjust to his players!
 Wow, Obama Care just got delayed by over a year because it is so complicated it cannot be understood - the beginning of the end!
 Oil prices just went over $100 per barrel for first time in nine months!
    Thanks!
    Will they pay us for the help-they have plenty of money (oil).
    Wrong!
    That's great!
   Good idea, will create one.
    Thank you:-)
    So true!
 “Having an ego and acknowledging it is a healthy choice. Our ego gives us a sense of purpose.” – Think Like a Champion
 “You have to have a good reason for doing what you’re doing because people connect with the why.” – Midas Touch
 “Get in. Get it done. Get it done right. Get out.” – My father, Fred C. Trump
 . has continually degraded  Catholic Church on the joke he calls a show  Catholics should boycott HBO.
 . are making a big mistake sending the doping  to rehab assignment. Should suspend him until investigation is over.
 I am honored to be receiving the American Spectator Foundation Award for excellence in entrepreneurialism in Washington DC this fall.
 Instead of attacking me, Ashish J. Thakkar should worry about the culture of corruption plaguing Uganda 
 I don’t know Dennis Kozlowski, who made Tyco into a great company & then went to prison, but he’s up for parole—let him go!
 Snowden, if you’re such a hero then come back home and face justice.  In reality, you are just another wiseguy traitor.
 Anti-Morsi protests are 10 times larger than 2011 anti-Mubarek protests. Interesting.
 Trump Puerto Rico is 1st development in Puerto Rico to combine lavish residences, world class golf & a beach 
  Thank you!
  I would stop paying him immediately.
 Yesterday Obama compared Nelson Mandela to George Washington in Africa. Do you think he really believes it?
 We should be concerned about the American worker & invest here. Not grant amnesty to illegals or waste $7B in Africa.
 Congratulations to  on joining  on  Crossfire. Show will be excellent!
 Millions protesting in Egypt for Morsi’s ouster  When will Obama demand Morsi’s resignation as he did to Mubarak
 Located in beautiful Briarcliff, NY,  features a 7,291 yard course just 25 minutes outside NYC 
 Via  "Donald Trump: I Can Fix America" 
 Our thoughts and prayers are w/ the families of the 19 brave firefighters who died fighting the Arizona wildfire. God bless them.
  I'll bet he was!
 Via WSOC_TV: "Donald Trump's son says family thinking about expanding in uptown Charlotte"  Great job 
 Fox and.Friends now!
 Edward Snowden is absolutely killing the the U.S. with other countries!
 19 firefighters killed in Arizona - terrible tragedy!
 Every penny of the $7 billion going to Africa as per Obama will be stolen - corruption is rampant!
    Thank you.
 I am going to Trump National Doral in Miami this week to check out the $250 million renovation. In construction, always watch the money!
 I am so disappointed that the Yankeed haven't terminatrd A-Rod's contract. There is no way they would not win in court! Hard to believe.
 Just watched Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg on 60 Minutes. She should spend more time trying to get the F stock price up & less on her ego!
    True!
 Everytime someone tweets that I wear a wig realize to yourself that you are dealing with "them" - just another sad & lonely hater and loser!
 I like doing this once a month for the haters & losers (and as they know)-I don't wear a "wig". Some may not like my hairstyle, but all mine
    Wrong, made a lot of money in Atlantic City-and most kids do blow their inheritance, or do nothing with it-look at stats.
    Thank you.
    So how is he allowed to get away with the crap he says?
 What my father really gave me is a good (great) brain, motivation and the benefit of his experience-unlike the haters and losers (lazy!).
 You mean the fact that my father left me some money (as a good father will) and I multiplied it many, many times to over $10 billion-is bad?
    They will mostly vote for Dems.
 I don't get  and his terrible show - he is dumb as a rock but tries so hard to pass himself off as a great intellect. Check past!
 Congratulations to  on being signed to co-host  Crossfire. Great move by Jeff Zucker.
 Obama’s carbon tax plan will finance more windmills in America. More real estate depreciated, wildlife killed, incl. bald eagles
 “Always strive to outdo yourself.” – Think Big
 Situated in the heart of downtown Toronto, the 65 story  offers an elegant and wonderful lifestyle 
 Another example of the destruction caused by wind turbines. Unnecessary waste--horrible! 
 How did Snowden, with not even a high school education, get access to top secret U.S. records. He then gave, or sold, those records-traitor!
    Only 40 hours? (just kidding).
 Can you imagine not taking Snowden's passport away before he jetted happily away to foreign lands (where he gave away many U.S. secrets).
 Keep difficulties in perspective. Ask yourself "is this a blip or is it a catastrophe?"
 Putin re Snowden issue “it is like shearing a pig: there’s lots of squealing and little fleece.”
 Call it any way you like, but Snowden is a traitor. When our country was great do you know what we did to traitors?
 “Mastering others is strength. Mastering yourself is true power.” – Lao Tzu
 There are huge opportunities for profits if you can think big & create big solutions for the human needs brought by trends. -Think Big
   Have fun!
   Very sad, isn't it!
   Thanks!
  Have fun.
  An answer would not be pretty!
   Our country needs the same fix-up.
 Whether you like it or not, Bush also gave us Obama!
 Remember, but for Conservatives, Bush would have given us not only Roberts but also Harriet Miers. Face it, Bush was terrible!
 Why do we always know how the four liberals are going to rule but have to think about which side the Republican judges will go.
 ObamaCare could "eat up your raise"  Why isn't Congress defunding it? They're obsessed with amnesty.
 What a surprise! Newly released audit proves that the IRS only targeted Tea Party groups 
 . was fabulous in  last night—as was the entire cast.
 Located in Palm Beach, FL, historic Mar-a-Lago features 20 exquisite acres filled w/ world class amenities 
 “Ability is nothing without opportunity.” - Napoleon Bonaparte
 As hard as it is to believe, sexting pervert Anthony Weiner is leading in some polls for Mayor of NYC.
 China loved Obama’s climate change speech yesterday. They laughed! It hastens their takeover of us as the leading world economy.
 Obama’s speech on climate change was scary. It will lower our standard of living and raise costs of fuel & food for everyone.
 “Don’t be afraid of mistakes. They can be  learning tools on the way to building something great for yourself.”  Think Like a Champion
 Shining over Fifth Avenue,  (a NY icon) offers a full service restaurant, bar, cafe, ice cream parlor and Gucci.
 One of the most expensive projects ever in Miami  $200M of renovations are right on schedule. When completed, will be elite!
   Real estate!
   Thank you!
  Interesting!
  Great!
  Good luck--work hard!
    The Wharton School of Finance is the best!
 Paula Deen made a big mistake in using a forbidden word but must be given some credit fot admitting her mistake. She will be back!
 The people of Scotland love the golf course I have built-it is now considered perhaps the greatest ever built! Thank you also to Robb Report
    Almost all residents love the course and the great things it has done for the community. Polls have shown 93% approval:-)
    Thank you.
    Miss USA Pageant is MUCH better!
  You can't even spell businessman. I use the B laws like Buffett, Kravis, Icahn, Zell etc. you dope-and learn how to spell.
    They gave up because the shirts, ties and cufflinks are hot sellers 
 New and great selection of ties, shirts and cufflinks - check them out!
    Thanks.
 Congratulations to our great resident of Chicago Trump Tower, Patrick Kane,  for the #StanleyCup win & winning MVP of series.
 Looking forward to my  summit visit and speech.
 . #Skywire As much credit as he's been given, he wasn’t given enough credit for his incredible feat over Grand Canyon.
 We need to worry about the American worker first!
 Unions who secure the border oppose the amnesty bill  Their expert opinions should at least be listened to.
 Becoming a US citizen is not a right, it’s a privilege.
 Yesterday, 15  senators sided with people who got into this country by breaking our laws.
  Thank you.
 Via  “Trump Iowa Visit Raises 2016 Speculation” 
   Go for it!
  Thank you!
  That's really nice--good luck!
  There certainly is plenty of evil.
  Thanks.
   Great!
  Much better, enjoy it!
 “Some events will wipe out one person but will make another even more tenacious.” – Think Like a Champion
 Our debt is about to top $17T. ObamaCare and China (& others) are killing American business.
 Snowden is showing how weak the U.S. has become.
 We are being embarrassed by Russia and China on Snowden (and much more) yet Obama is talking about global warming on Tuesday.
 Excited and honored to be addressing  summit in Iowa this August. 
 Overlooking Central Park,  brings both glamor and prestige to your Five Diamond hotel stay 
 Via  Olympic golf course designer named by Trump-Damac 
 Via  " oversees new healthy room-service menu at Trump Hotels" 
  Happy Birthday Anthony,
 Even liberals & Democrats think Eric Schneiderman’s use of the Atty General’s office is unfair & unethical. 
 See Charles Gasparino’s article in today’s NYPost about Eric Schneiderman’s witch hunt against Republicans 
  or Ireland?
     Have fun!
    Thanks, it is a beautiful city.
  Enjoy your stay!
    Great meeting you!
   Good luck.
 Receiving the  trophy for best new golf course in the world- Trump International Golf Links Scotland. 
 Putin says Russia can’t allow a weakening of its nuclear deterrent—U.S. wants to reduce—are we crazy?
   Thanks.
  Good luck.
    Thanks, I do and will!
  Thanks!
 Due diligence includes increasing your financial IQ daily.
 The best investors are visionaries—they look beyond the present.
 Vision remains vision until you focus, do the work, and bring it down to earth where it will do some good.
 After one of the great chokes in the history of sports, it will be hard for the Spurs to beat the Heat - but who knows. Good game on now!
 My people caught the person who committed "forgery" of the James Gandolfini-Obama Care phoney quote attributed to me-fraud. Arrest coming?
 . stopped by to say hello. 
 Re negotiation: Trust your instincts even after you've honed your skills. They're there for a reason.
   Thanks--it will be great.
 Keep focused on your goals. Practice positive thinking. View any conflict as an opportunity--look at the solution, not the problem.
 Negotiation is persuasion more than power. Negotiation includes a lot of fine lines--and that's what makes it an art.
 Our debt is about to reach $17T. Iraq has $20T in oil reserves. Interesting.
  Loser Danny is obsessed with Trump.
 We know who did the hoax of James Gandolfini and ObamaCare. Be careful, Mister.
 James Gandolfini was a remarkable talent.  He was also a decent man.  We will all miss him.
 “Keep your brand standard in mind, and your expansion will seem possible as well as gratifying.” – Midas Touch
 Some dope said I deleted a tweet about James G. There was no tweet and there was no delete-a totally fabricated story (nobody saw tweet).
 Who would really believe I would say such a thing about a guy I truly liked, James Gandolfini.  Sadly, very sick people use my name.
 I never made the ridiculous comment about James G. and Obama Care - somebody else put it out and attributed it to me. Not my style!
      Thank you.
 I salute all Tea Party Patriots for marching on DC today.  Stand strong!
 Great to see  back on  She's a wonderful woman and commentator.
 . book ‘The Amateur’ is out in paper back.  Lots of insights.
    So true.
  Thank you!
    Thank you, very nice!
 Amazing comeback by The Heat - your friends at your favorite golf club, Trump National Doral, are proud of you. NOW for game 7!
 Watch the game-really good.
 Great basketball game going on right now!
 Do you think Putin will be going to The Miss Universe Pageant in November in Moscow - if so, will he become my new best friend?
 The Miami Heat is getting it's ass kicked - they better start playing or it will be a long Summer for them.
 The Miss Universe Pageant will be broadcast live from MOSCOW, RUSSIA on November 9th. A big deal that will bring our countries together!
 I met a Trump Twitter hater last night (well known). As he came near me he nervously said, "Mr. Trump, it is an honor to meet you sir!" Nice
 Young entrepreneurs – never back down. Take the hits and get up.  That’s what makes a winner.
 Keep testing your limits. Never become complacent.  Always think big!
 All I can say is that if I were President, Snowden would have already been returned to the U.S. (by their fastest jet) and with an apology!
 Snowden is doing great damage to our relations with other countries and U.S.prestige. China is laughing at us as he continues illegal action
 Snowden is sitting in China and taunting the U.S. He is mocking us as a Country. Great time to place a tax on China trade if not turned over
 Like it or not, haters and losers, everybody is talking about Miss U.S.A. and Miss Utah. By the way she is a fine young woman-unfair to her.
 Frankly, for a writer, I don’t think  stuff is good. In fact, it’s terrible.
 I own  but he has his friends & haters & losers tweeting that he beat me. He can’t beat me at anything!
 A country that does not control or respect its own borders is a country destined for failure. Secure our borders!
 Trending story on Miss Utah is very unfair. She simply lost her train of thought—could happen to anyone!   
 My  int. on Obama scandals not resonating, no retribution on Benghazi, Obama not being engaged 
 Congratulations to   &  on making  list of "10 Journos You Don't Want to Fight on Twitter."
 . &  both did a wonderful job hosting  Everyone loved  &  performances!
 The crowning moment – Conneticut’s Erin Brady winning  2013 
 Congratulations to Connecticut’s Erin Brady on being crowned the 2013  America will be well-represented in 
 A family in Las Vegas just stopped a violent home invasion by shooting one of the perpetrators-the other fled and will be captured. Great!
 We should stay the hell out of Syria, the "rebels" are just as bad as the current regime. WHAT WILL WE GET FOR OUR LIVES AND $ BILLIONS?ZERO
 Happy Father's Day to all, even the haters and losers!
    Come to Miss U.S.A. tomorrow in Las Vegas-will be a great evening!
 “Don’t find fault. Find a remedy.” – Henry Ford
  Have a good time, enjoy this great city.
   Great!
   Thanks!
 For an advance preview of the Miss USA 2013 contestants, as well as other show details, go to 
 My  interview on Snowden the traitor, national security and China hacking us 
   Thanks Anna.
 . &  are co-hosting Miss USA 2013 -- Sunday night at 9 PM ET on NBC.  will be performing. Tune in!
 Watch Miss USA 2013 Sunday night at 9 PM ET. Live from Planet Hollywood, Las Vegas. 
 Father’s Day is Sunday. Find the perfect gift.Trump Signature Collection is exclusively available  
 . and I are looking forward to visiting Vancouver next week.  Big announcement…
 A friend of mine went to  and sent me this beautiful cake which we put in the atrium of  
 Still a great time to buy residential property.  The courts are holding up foreclosures.  Buy directly from the banks.
 It’s Thursday.  How much has OPEC ripped us off today?
 Challenges present opportunities.  Always keep your focus and stay calm.
 Thanks to everyone for your kind birthday wishes -- very nice!
    You have no chance!
   Hater, Danny is getting his ass kicked like he has all of his life!
    Now tell the truth.
 Just tried watching Modern Family - written by a moron, really boring. Writer has the mind of a very dumb and backward child. Sorry Danny!
   .Sam, you are so pathetic!
 Lightweight  is too stupid to see that China (and others) is destroying the U.S. economically and our leaders are helpless! SAD.
 Is it a coincidence that the Middle East has blown up since Obama became president?
 Why isn’t the  congress doing everything possible to defund and cut ObamaCare?
 I can't resist hitting lightweight  verbally when he starts up because he is just.so pathetic and easy (stupid)!
 .  Danny--You're a total loser!
 Looking forward to speaking at   Gala Dinner on Friday in D.C. His staff has been great!
  Have fun and thanks.
 . Danny—Let your bosses on Modern Family lend you the money to play the game.  Show courage!
 . You’re starting up again because people have forgotten you. You wouldn’t take my bet but it’s (cont) 
 If  dropped out of the economically unfeasible wind farm development in Aberdeen, who is (cont) 
 If Snowden was such a hero then he would be in America.  He is escaping justice!
 I've been warning about China since as early as the 80’s. No one wanted to listen. Now our country is in real trouble. #TimetoGetTough
    A round of golf compliments of me: Trump National Golf Club--Los Angeles.
 Wow, sexual assaults in the military have gone through the roof, far worse than anybody could have predicted!
    Happy birthday Victoria.
   Thanks Matt!
 Amazing…  tried to destroy Aberdeen.
 . has topped Carbon Data’s rankings of the most carbon-intensive companies in the EU’s emissions trading scheme.
 “The risk of a wrong decision is preferable to the terror of indecision.” – Maimonides
   Thank you.
  Thank you.
 Keep stimulating your mind with big ideas. Fill your mind with new information, & use this information to spawn new ideas. - Think Big
 Via  by  "Donald Trump says ‘This country is going to hell in a handbasket’" 
 Congrats to  on winning  the  Mayor's Award for Lifetime Achievement! I love Barbara!
 With so many scandals plaguing Obama, it seems that they all hit him at the right time. Could help him get away w/ all of them.
 Belated congratulations to  on winning the French Open. A great player & person!
 . has panoramic Pacific Ocean views, features a 7,242-yard public course designed by Pete Dye
 Please don’t pay attention to all of those phony tweets that mention my twitter handle relative to “diet” -- it is a total scam.
 Great going to Bob Kraft & Bill Belichick of the  on   Tim is a winner just like them!
    Thanks and great job!
   Me too, thanks!
    She will run!
 . and I on the 18th hole at Trump International Golf Links Scotland- 
    Thank you!
  Thank you.
 “Yesterday's home runs don't win today's games.” - Babe Ruth
 Shirts and ties are doing great 
 Somerset County, New Jersey SWAT Team- really fantastic people! 
   Thanks, just really busy!
 “Worry destroys focus.” – Think Big
 China is openly sailing warships in our waters & arming countries in our hemisphere including Mexico  Ally?
 A coincidence that the NSA leaker is living openly in Hong Kong?! At the same time the Chinese Pres. met with Obama in CA.
 . int. on gov. collecting data, whistle blower hiding in China & no bikinis in Miss World pageant 
 Via  by  “U.S. taps Donald Trump to convert DC's Old Post Office into luxury hotel” 
 Via  "Robb Report: Trump Scotland Best Golf Course in the World" 
   Lots and yes.
 Canadians: My ultra luxury private plane will be featured on Sunday's episode of #MightyPlanes on  miss it at 8 ET!
 Vote for your favorite  contestant --- the 2013 #MissUSA Fan Vote at  !
 Canadians: My ultra luxury private plane will be featured on Sunday's episode of #MightyPlanes  on  miss it at 8 ET!
 Newsstand sales for  run by sleepy Graydon Carter, are down almost 20%. All he cares about are his bad food restaurants!
 I hope everybody goes to Macy's today to get Donald J.  Trump shirts, ties, suits and cufflinks - they are really beautiful at low price
 I'm in Scotland getting ready for a major news conference on the Great Dunes of Scotland announcing the second North Sea course - amazing!
 “Be flexibly focused. Focus does not mean being narrow-minded or rigid.” – Think Big
  Thanks.
  You could never beat me at golf--18 club championships.
   But didn't he bet on his own team--he paid the price.
 We look forward to making the Old Post Office in DC one of the great hotels of the World. 
 I feel bad for all  employees. Every day at work, they see circulation going down as Graydon runs his bad food restaurants.
 I've done the largest house sale in U.S. history by selling a Palm Beach mansion for $100M, $60M more than I paid. I love real estate.
 Stephanie Cutter Attended WH Meetings With IRS Chief   Great investigative work by Jim Hoft 
 Remember Trump ties & shirts  for Fathers Day--your father will love you even more!
 Dress your best. Trump Signature Collection, exclusively available  tops all male business attire 
 Looking over New York City with luxurious 5 Star hotel rooms,   top dining & amenities 
 Via  "Trump's protégé earns US Open spot" 
 Kern County, CA has secured $1.2B for windfarms  They also just secured more eagle deaths & low property values.
 A-Rod has disgraced the blessed  organization, lied to the fans & embarrassed NYC. He does not deserve to wear the pinstripes.
  So true!
  Our clubhouse on the North Sea. 
 Giving away money and revolutionizing crowdfunding. Follow  to see which causes are financed daily
 This just in re: FundAnything and producer Brad Wyman 
  Thanks Brandon.
   Wish your mother a happy birthday.
  Thank you!
     Thank you.
    Thanks, very proud of it.
  Thank your wonderful dad.
  Totally!
 Pete Rose should now be allowed in The Baseball Hall of Fame. The all-time hits leader has paid the price already!
 George Steinbrenner would have done a major number on A Rod - there is no way he would have gotten paid, even with the help of the union!
 I can't believe the Yankees continue to pay A Rod - they have a perfect right to stop paying (and should have stopped a long time ago).
    The show is a joke in comparison to the original Apprentice, but it does pay me a lot of money.
   Not concerned about them-weren't they brutally mugging people in the Park?  Go check your facts.
 Likewise, the primary victims of violent crimes are in the African American and Hispanic communities. These people want LAW AND ORDER now!
 When it comes to violent crime, and if we are going to solve the problem, we must stop being so politically correct-must tell it like it is!
 Sadly, the overwhelming amount of violent crime in our major cities is committed by blacks and hispanics-a tough subject-must be discussed.
 According to Bill O'Reilly, 80% of all the shootings in New York City are blacks-if you add Hispanics, that figure goes to 98%. 1% white.
 Thanks to  for putting on such a great concert fot  John was a winner on Celebrity Apprentice and is a fantastic guy.
 My son  has just done another great event and raised a lot of money for  He is a really good boy who loves helping kids.
 I will be going to Aberdeen, Scotland today to help my team celebrate the great success of Trump International Golf Links-press conference.
    Innocent of what, weren't they brutally mugging people in the Park that night? The City better not settle this case!
   They should have stopped paying him a long time ago.
    Wrong you idiot!
 The two dumbest interviews in history may go down as Lance Armstrong, who is being sued by everyone in the world, & Michael Douglas.
 Does anyone else have two golf pros—John Nieporte & Jim Herman—who qualified for the U.S. Open?  Could this be an all-time record?
 Congratulations to Jim Herman, my ass't golf pro at Trump Nat'l Golf Club/Bedminster, NJ for qualifying for the U.S. Open! 
 Whitey Bulger’s prosecution starts today.  Will be one of the most interesting and intriguing trials.
 “TRUMP: IMMIGRATION BILL A REPUBLICAN 'DEATH WISH'”  via  by 
 Via  TheScotsman: “Donald Trump to lay out new golf course plan” 
 Via  by Courtney Coren: "Trump: China Gets Iraq Oil; US Gets Nothing" 
 Congratulations to my head pro of Trump International Golf Club (Florida) John Nieporte for qualifying for the U.S. Open!  
  Happy Birthday!
 26,000 sexual assaults in the military last year-way up from previous years. Armed Forces are in total turmoil!
 The Miami Heat looked great tonight - congratulations from all of your friends at your favorite place in Miami, Trump National Doral.
    Thank you John!
   That is true.
   Oh really, weren't they brutally mugging people all over the Park? - and now they are seeking damages - ridiculous!
  You mean like Buffett, Kravis, Icahn, Paulson and almost all other bigs-I never went Bankrupt dumb ass!
    Thank you.
  Thanks, 57th and Fifth.
  Say hi to your father--enjoy the tie.
  Thank you, very nice.
  Thank you!
   Thanks, great building!
   You always look great on TV, even without a Trump tie!
 FLASHBACK: Donald Trump Answers Boy's Prayer for New Bike  via 
 No better way to celebrate Flag Day & my birthday than being the guest of honor   conference on June 14th!
 . continues to do great work in exposing the left wing financing behind amnesty 
 Pres. Obama is meeting with China’s Pres. this week  He will get zero deliverables. China laughs at us.
 70 stories above Panama Bay,  the majestic sail design is Central America’s architectural icon 
 “Never Ignore Donald Trump”  by Jeffrey Lord 
 Via  "Donald Trump Eyes 2016" by  
   Thanks Paul.
   Thanks--it is a great honor to have produced it.
  You don't need me--Mar-a-Lago is the best & most beautiful place to get married. If I'm there I'll stop by. Congrats!
 Congratulations to Aberdeen and Scotland for just having our great golf course named Best New Course In World by The Robb Report.
 Thank you to the Robb Report, The Best of the Best issue, for just naming Trump International Golf Links the Best New Golf Course In World!
   Find something you love doing--you have to have passion for your work. Then work hard and keep focused. Good luck!
 Just got a great new selection of ties & shirts   Go buy them now for Father’s Day—they’re beautiful!
 Ms. Goldberg & her blowhard lawyer should be ashamed for having brought this frivolous case. They should pay me damages!
 Today, Judge St. Eve ruled in my favor on the two remaining claims brought by Goldberg in Chicago.  The case is now officially over…
  Good luck!
  The architectural boat tour is great.
 “Protect the downside and the upside will take care of itself." – The Art of the Deal
 Serious stuff-IRS Commissioner visited White House 157 times, far more than Sec. of State or Defense. What a big story this is!
    Thanks Heather, and you do a great job on FOX!
 The Yankees really have to be embarrassed losing all four games to the Mets - my great friend George Steinbrenner would be going nuts!
  Hi Sara--have a great time!
   Thanks Matt.
 “I pride myself on being obstinate, stubborn, & tough.  I think those are important qualities found in successful people.” – Think Big
 Young entrepreneurs should always remember that if you do not promote yourself, no one else will!
 Frack now and frack fast unless we want to continue to be dependent on countries that hate us.
 . will never solve the issues with the Ministry of Defense. Besides, they smartly just left the project.
 One of the many reasons that  dropped out of windfarm project—they couldn’t solve military radar defense problems
 Little Mac Miller’s next album may bomb.  He can’t use my name again for sales.
 .  renovations are  revitalizing Miami. The new course will be a great challenge 
 “The Conservative does not despise government. He despises tyranny." - 
 China has done great under Obama. Increased private US holdings by 500%. Hacks our military & R&D. Robs us blind daily.#timetogettough
 Via  "Trump: Americans 'Desperate for Leadership'" 
 My  interview re: 2016, the need for leadership in our country, Syria & China hacking our military 
  True--I am the king of eradicating debt--it's easy!
  Thank you!
    Dying magazine.
  Thanks.
  Thank you.
 Surprising a future Nobel prize winner on today’s  
  Thanks!
  Thanks.
    Thanks Mallory!
     Which one?
   Thanks.
 “Is business success a natural talent? I think it’s a combination of aptitude, work and luck.” – Think Like a Champion
   Thanks, but I receive from U.K. also.
   Thanks.
  Thanks, but I don't feel like it--work too hard!
   I'll bet you had a great son.
  No.
  Hi Joanna.
   Hi to your sons. Tell them to never give up!
 Military has announced that China has successfully hacked our advanced weapon designs. China is our enemy.Should we offset this on our debt?
 House GOP better get its act together.Defund ObamaCare. Out negotiate on debt ceiling. Form commissions on Benghazi & IRS. No excuses!
 . has tremendous talent and a proven ability to lead.  He deserves to be in the 
 Obama wants to unilaterally put a no-fly zone in Syria to protect Al Qaeda Islamists  Syria is NOT our problem.
 The new amnesty bill is over 1000 pages.  It is another monstrosity a la ObamaCare.
     Very cool, thank you.
  Thank you.
  Pretty much!
    Enjoy!
    Thanks Chris!
 Bringing true luxury to the Windy City,  soars 92 levels over the Chicago River 
 . Best 2013 Golf Courses: Trump Int'l Golf Links Scotland. Great honor, great magazine—thanks! 
  Yes.
 I have a surprise for a really special kid on Thursday’s episode of  with  
    Happy birthday!
    Yes.
    But I know  and think he would do really well-tough, smart and a good guy!
    That's what I hear.
 “Never give up on yourself.” – Think Big
  Thanks, people love them (
 “We have a system that increasingly taxes work and subsidizes nonwork.” - Milton Friedman
  Yes you can for country's good.
  U.S.A. is not rich, owes 17 trillion dollars.
 Inflation is here.  Record beef prices are hitting consumers pockets    Bad for family grills.
   Thanks.
   No, the project sucks!
  Fight hard, they are horrible!
   No, beautiful and really sweet and nice.
  Thanks.
 Via   “Trump researching 2016 run” 
   Yes!
 I commend Roger Ailes for publicly supporting  employees against the Obama administration's intimidation of its reporters.
 Once  renovations are complete, the Old Post Office will be  most elite & iconic hotel in DC 
 John Menard of Menards home improvement stores in Midwest treats employees horribly -- should they form a union? 
 Who would be stupid enough to invest in  ill-conceived windfarm when it will lose £25M yearly?
 Additionally, two executives  are under major investigation & they are unable to get the many permits necessary.
 . lead investor in Aberdeen windfarm fiasco, has dropped out—project not economically viable--& protestors hate it.
 We spend billions of dollars helping nations all over the World but with hurricane Sandy and Oklahoma tornado not one nation helped us!
 I like John McCain but we have to start rebuilding the United States instead of countries who hate us and want us to fail - be smart!
 Why is Senator John McCain in Syria visiting with the rebels- MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
    Thanks!
 It's 46º (really cold) and snowing in New York on Memorial Day - tell the so-called "scientists" that we want global warming right now!
 See, dummy Danny Zuker, who I never heard until this, started something that he couldn't finish-gutless and unwilling to take my bet!
 Nation's infrastructure is collapsing, MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
 It's freezing outside, where the hell is "global warming"??
  on your best day you can't come close to beating me, I'll kick your ass every time-take the bet Danny (check with M.F. boss).
    Thanks!
    I never went bankrupt - just like Buffett, Icahn, Kravis and Paulson - as you know!
 Sorry folks, got to go to work now - but "I'll be baaaaack"!
  Just killing time!
 Come on  take the bet, show your friends and family (& your bosses on Modern Family) that you're not "chicken shit"
 If  competed against me and.won (which not too many people do), he could win millions of $'s for himself or his charity!
 The lawyer I just beat in Chicago was a buffoon but was a lot smarter and sharper than  Come on Danny, make the bet!
  is a weak and ineffective guy with a long string of failed shows who got his ass kicked last night.He's afraid to make the wager
  Thank you, I was dealing with a very bad person!
    Thanks, Country is in trouble.
  everyone is saying you are being beaten badly at this game but you can turn things around quickly if you will go for the deal.
 Hope everyone is watching the Finale rerun of Celebrity Apprentice on CNBC-especially the haters and losers! It is on right now.
 No  it's making you crazy because you don't have the guts to play the game. Come on Danny, you can do it!
  I hope you pick up a lot of twitter followers by this so people can see what a total asshole you are!
   Danny, you're not having fun, you are getting your ass kicked - afraid to make the deal?
 No  , just the opposite, lots of money can go to charity if you have the guts to play the game (deal)!
 Remember,  , you are not even the real "boss" of Modern Family - no big $$$$$$'s for you!
  Come on Danny, are u afraid of the DEAL (be careful, I'm really good at deals).
  Bigger means bigger dummy, you really are stupid, aren't you!
  Another racist remark by you, Danny, are you a racist?
 I know you don't like to hear this  but the biggest nights of The Apprentice were far "bigger" than the biggest nights of Mod Fam
   Five great golf courses with the new Blue Monster currrently under construction!
 Just got final renderings of Trump National Doral in Miami - there will be nothing like it in the Country, will be the best!
  are you ready for the deal?
  Wrong!
  are you ready for the deal?
   And dumb people like 
 I never heard of  until his very dumb and endless tweets started pouring out of insecure mind-but I have a great deal for him!
 I was just told by a television pro thay  is one of the truly dumbest guys in the business-he's obsessed with T-so many flops!
 It should be mandatory that all haters and losers use their real name or identification when tweeting - they will no longer be so brave!
    Wrong, totally proved my case but didn't get damages because the libel laws in this Country suck!
    I do, thanks.
   Are you making less than minimum wage, don't worry, the government will protect you. Afraid to give your real name? You should be.
  You're nuts, go get a job.
  Totally wrong dopey.
   Thanks Jimmy.
 Great investor John Paulson just sought bankruptcy protection for a unit of his hedge fund-very smart-but he didn't go bankrupt you morons!
 The biggest business people have used the bankruptcy laws to their advantage-Warren B, Icahn, Kravis and this week John Paulson-for haters!
 Via  "Trump wins at trial, calls woman suing him 'horrible human being'"
   Thanks Gary, it was great having you on the show, may your foundation spend the money well.
 In your planning, know how much risk you can take. Evaluate whether the returns will be worth the risk.
 Looking forward to being guest of honor at   Patriot Gala Dinner on June 14th in DC. Flag day and my birthday.
 Must read article by  “Anthony Weiner is a twit who treats women like dirt” 
 Memorial Day is a time to honor our nation's finest who made the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom. God bless them all.
 WH counsel met with IRS lawyer 3x in 2012, once in September  But Obama just learned through news reports?
  Thanks.
  Thanks.
 Let's see whether or not Chuck Townsend  is smart enough to fire Graydon Carter, who only cares about his bad food restaurants
 Mrs. Goldberg, who filed the Chicago case many years ago, is a vicious and conniving woman--loved beating her.
 Thank you for all of the positive response on my Chicago lawsuit victory yesterday. Most of you saw through the phony age card ploy.
   That sounds great--a bad woman.
  Thank you! (I think)
   True!
   True, they are being decimated.
  Yes, you can't allow people to scam you & rip you off.
  In addition to ripping me off.
  Thanks.
  Read this & you will understand why Vanity Fair is going down the tubes.
  Thanks--and great job, David--what a great evening.
  Thanks Joannah, they are sad and lost people.
 I loved beating these two terrible human beings. I would never recommend that anyone use her lawyer, he is a total loser!
 Jury was unanimous after hearing the made up case against my co. Filed many years ago, she.and her pathetic lawyer should pay me big damages
 The so called 87 year old "lady" was a vicious and skilled investor who was trying to rip me off with made up facts and a blowhard lawyer.
 It's important to remain open to new ideas and new information. Keep your door open every day to something innovative and energizing.
 Take a sneak peek into one of Trump Park Avenue's most exclusive residences on the market- 
 I very much appreciate all of the great reviews & comments on my speech in Michigan--the people were great.
   Thanks, I had a great time.
   Pay attention and have fun.
  Happy Birthday!
   True
 Scotland is having a virtual revolt over obsolete wind turbines which are driving up energy costs and killing the bird population (and more)
    Keep figthing, don't let the windfarms destroy your property and life!
   That's because I know him-he's a lowlife!
    They are dummies!
    Sorry, Graydon Carter is a major loser, just ask his wife!
  Not even close dummy, he is strictly small time.
    So true Mike.
    Hello Dawn.
 Pervert Anthony Wiener will never be able to get away from his perversion-the cure rate is ZERO.
 . could come back if Graydon Carter paid as much attention as he does to his bad food restaurants. 
 If the great Si Newhouse were still running  he would fire Graydon Carter immediately- circulation tanking.
 Via  "Donald Trump speaks in Novi, drawing largest crowd in Oakland County Republican Party's history" 
 Via  "Donald Trump speaks in Novi(Michigan), draws record-breaking crowd" 
 .  is one of the top media outlets in the country.  has revolutionized political commentary and reporting.
 Jodi Arias jury is having a hard time with the death penalty-judge just sent them back for further deliberatuon.
 Amazingly  is going to run. The cure rate for his problem is 0. Lots of other things will come out.
 Graydon Carter is laughing at the stupidity of Chuck Townsend on his contract renewal--- even he doesn't believe it! 
 I can't believe  would renew Graydon Carter's contract......
 ...... Circulation is way down and all he thinks about are his bad food restaurants. 
 The Lincoln Day Dinner last night in Michigan was fantastic. Record attendance and tremendous enthusiasm- I loved it!
     Thanks Tanja
 One season ends and another starts.  Already casting for the next  Great news for charity--$13 million so far.
 Very sad that Republican donors were targeted by Obama’s IRS.
 Isn’t it amazing that Obama “never knew” about the IRS scandals until he saw it in the news?!
 Shock - Obama WH given three pinocchios for lying about Benghazi emails 
   Hi Amy, see you soon.
    Thanks Van--so true.
   See you later.
   Dennis--you were great--thanks!
 Good timing:  won big for American Red Cross last night on  Now the Red Cross is in Oklahoma doing a great job.
 Because of the tornado tragedy I will not be doing  tonight. I wish everyone well!
 Excited to speak at tomorrow night's  Lincoln Day dinner in Michigan  “All time sales record, over 2000.” 
    Thanks.
    Thank you.
 We may get out of ObamaCare because the train wreck is impossible to implement   It is a disaster.
 Everyone should go see   Great documentary showcasing  legacy.
 . the winner of  after last night's victory- 
   Thanks Dave.
   Thanks.
   Thanks.
   Very nice Denise, thank you.
   Ok. Ben--Congratulations on your graduation--and good luck!
    It was my honor, you're a great guy & your mother would be very proud of you.
 .    & I  thank our loyal fans for another great season of 
  Thanks!
   Great, enjoy the hotel.
 Will be doing Fox & Friends at 7 A.M. It never ends (hopefully)!
 I love that, in addition to everything else, so much money is raised for such great causes on Celebrity Apprentice-all proud of that!
 Last night's live show was so much fun. Congrats to the entire cast, they are all winners!  From beginning over $13 million for charity.
     Obama put up nothing, zilch!
 Ivanka and Joan Rivers will be working hard tonight at the Live Finale - everybody must watch the OPENING at 9.
    How are you - $5.5 million (a bargain).
 The cast for next season looks really good!
    Yes.
 Just left the set of The Apprentice - the live show tonight will be fantastic - and something very big and very different is going to happen
 How badly will the Country be hurt by the three scandals and the very poor implementation and cost of Obama Care?
    Thanks Lee!
   Much more than anybody knows dopey, much more - and it will soon be revealed in detail.
     On that I would beat almost everyone!
  Only in your weak mind!
    Thanks, only the haters disagree!
    I don't, he makes me money!
 Sugar is nowhere near being a billionaire-and I know, he works for me!
    Thanks.
    It's easy, just think of haters as losers with.little imagination and even less understanding of success-and very lazy!
    Tell your friends son - YOU'RE FIRED TUMOR!
   Tell your aunt she is terrific!
   Rather amazing, wasn't it!
 I'm watching Knicks game-I'd bet all of those guys with the terrible tattoos wish they never got them-too bad, too late!
 Why didn't President Obama just go inside when it started raining yesterday - common sense! The two Marines looked very uncomfortable-& wet.
 Who do you like of the final two? #CelebApprentice 
 The LIVE FINALE of  is this Sunday at 9/8C. Watch and see who will be the first ever All-Star Celebrity Apprentice.
 Enviro friendly? "AP IMPACT: Obama administration allows wind farms to kill eagles, birds despite federal laws" 
 This Sunday’s LIVE FINALE of  will be tough & nasty. Be sure to watch  &  fight to the finish!
 People love   #CelebApprentice
 The sexual abuse that is so rampant has, according to generals, greatly weakened our military. They have failed to stop it.
 Just in—all efforts to stop sexual abuse in the military have totally failed—in fact, the stoppers have become the abusers.
 . is a piece of garbage but I think it is very nice & charitable that they employ the no-talent illiterate hack 
 Congratulations to my friend  on  1,000th show consecutively #1 in his time slot! Great going!
    Thanks, very nice.
 Celebrity Apprentice will be LIVE on Sunday at 9 PM (from New York City).Casting has already begun for next season.
 In other words, our military has a very big problem!
 Unfortunately with some men when the poison kicks in (not me of course) there are no rules or guidelines in the military that will stop them
 I was never a fan of Bush 2 FOR MANY REASONS, including the fact that we should never have gone into Iraq but once there, kept the oil! DUMB
 Our very stupidly run Country better stop being so "politically correct" or we won't have a Country to run anymore!
 Many generals and military leaders are now saying "I told you so!"  They say this will have big impact on military strength & national sec.
 General says that the Armed Forces will be severely weakened if the large scale rape and sexual abuse problem is not brought under control.
 Army officer who led a sexual abuse prevention unit was just fired after being charged with violently going after his wife.What is going on?
 America's top Army general has warned of a crisis unless sexual abuse in the military is quickly brought undet control.Forces greatly hurt!
    Big Second Amendment believer but background checks to weed out the sicko's are fine.
    But they are the folks I like the best - by far!
    Way less - and you are soooo stupid!
 Looks like we will have a pervert running for mayor after all - just what New York City needs - and he will revert back to form, always do!
    Good to see you also - I will be watching!
    Thanks Andrew!
 . public golf course features spectacular panoramic Pacific Ocean views, an elite attraction 
   Go for it.
   Happy Birthday!
 “The most terrifying words in the English language are: I'm from the government and I'm here to help.” – Pres. Ronald Reagan
 ObamaCare is already done. HHS Sec. Sebelius is trying to force private companies to finance implementation 
 “It’s always great to be in business with Donald Trump,” said  president Emilio Romano. 
 Legendary Illusionist v. Country Music Star.  This Sunday’s LIVE Finale of  is a historic matchup.  MUST SEE TV!
   Do what you love, work hard, keep your focus and your momentum intact. Good luck!
   It helped!
  Not too many around!
   Very true!
  Perhaps so!
    Thanks.
    Thanks Michael.
 Obama & his people did a brilliant job of delaying these scandals until after the election. Mitt must be going wild thinking about it!
 If these scandals happened before the election, Obama could not have won.
    True!
  True and thanks.
  Thanks!
   This is one of the worst made and inaccurate documentaries I have ever seen. Filmmaker Mike Tollin has zero talent.Also-boring
    Thanks Andrew.
 I wonder what the next scandal will be in D.C.? Can we handle yet another?
 The three political disasters could lead to a major and complete political meltdown!
 The "lady" in Chicago that I'm fighting owes me $500, 000 and is sophisticated  & vicious. She made up a story & plays the "age card" - bad!
 I totally respect that Angelina Jolie has shown such great bravery in the face of danger - she has really come a long and positive way!
    Really terrible and a sad day for our Country!
 Not since Watergate have we been going thru a time like this--Benghazi, IRS, wiretapping of 
 “Circumstances are beyond human control, but our conduct is in our own power.” -- Benjamin Disraeli
 This Sunday’s LIVE FINALE of  puts  against  Watch two great competitors battle to win!
 . is NY's best golf club. A 5 Star Diamond Award winner w/ an elite golf course & top facilities 
 32º in New York - it's freezing! Where the hell is global warming when you need it?
 Benghazi. Obama lied. Our people died.
 . once again made it to the Final Four. A true talent and great friend to #CelebApprentice  Great job!
 . did amazing on #CelebApprentice   Raising over $505K for  she made it to the Final Four.  Congrats Lisa.
 “Never judge someone by their job title. You’d be surprised at the talents people can have.” – Midas Touch
 My  int. on IRS targeting Tea Party, the Benghazi death scandal &  v.  finale 
  GREAT playing, you are the best!
   Have fun #1.
 I AM PLEASED TO INFORM YOU THAT CELEBRITY APPRENTICE HAS BEEN RENEWED FOR ANOTHER SEASON BY NBC. SEE YOU AT THE NBC UPFRONTS TOMORROW.
    Thanks Sam, and it's doing great!
 You will love Celebrity Apprentice tonight - 9 PM on NBC. Must watch from beginning - two early firings!
 Two people fired very early on Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9 leading up to next weeks live Finale. Don't get angry at me tonight!
    Thanks!
 Watching  on NBC playing great golf. Tiger won The WGC Cadillac Championship at Trump National Doral this year. I love Tiger!
   That would be great Philip!
     Thanks Chris - they know the real facts but don't choose to use them-very dishonest!
  Thanks and true!
    Based on your picture I can see why - you look lost and in need of a cheap lifeline.
  Mark Cuban is a bully who is physically very soft and therefore should immediately stop wearing T shirts. No strength!
  can't hold a.candle to Donald.Trump - he is a laughing stock in Great Britain (but his show pays me lots of money, so I'm happy)
 The success of Shark Tank over the years is a total joke compared to the success of The Apprentice, one of the biggest hits in T.V. history.
    But I love insulting people who don't have the goods but think they do!
 The Apprentice, on the other hand, has been a MAJOR television hit, often times finishing #1. Even now, after 13 seasons, it wins its slot!
  is a short ball hitter who had a massive failure on television, The Benefactor. Now he is one of many on a modest ratings show, S T.
    Thanks, no wonder our Country is  in such trouble!
    I have not run it for many years, I sold it a long time ago (great deal, great timing). When I owned it, a top place!
    Thank you and very true!
    Thanks Patti.
     Sugar can't get himself arrested-but at least he's making me money-keep begging Sugar you dog!
   Your man, little Jon S(?) can't win, he's not smart enough or quick enough!
    Little Jon Stewart(?) Is a pussy, he would be hopeless in a debate with me!
  Stewart (?) wouldn't have even a little chance in a debate with me. He's totally overrated - not fast enough or smart enough!
   You must be kidding - I kicked both of their ugly assses!
   Not even close - he is just, as you know, a very bad copy (who I profit from).
   I never endorsed Judd - I'm with Senator Mitch all the way!
 Just left Trump National Doral in Miami - under massive construction - The Blue Monster will be one of the greatest courses ever built!
 Leightweight  Sugar virtually begged my reps to have me stop mocking him. Every time this dope goes on Apprentice I make money-too easy
 “It's not that I'm so smart, it's just that I stay with problems longer.” - Albert Einstein
 No investor would be stupid enough to pour their money into the bottomless Vattenfall pit. They totally gave up 
 Whether you have someone managing your finances or you're doing it yourself, money, like anything, takes maintenance & planning to grow.
  Very nice, thanks!
  You are 100% correct - thank you!
 Dummy, I'm asking a question - look at the question mark at the end of the sentence! Use your head.
 . is right. Watergate is much different than Benghazi. No one died in Watergate.
 See my picks at  at   and giving away money!!! #FundAnything
 I watched  this AM re:  & dating. She looks terrific, better than ever, any guy would be lucky to be with her.
 For all of the morons who have been complaining about my comment on sexual assault & rape in the military, (cont) 
 “The most important thing in communication is hearing what isn't said.” - Peter Drucker
 Sadly, firing can be an essential and responsible business decision. It isn't pleasant, but lopping off a branch can save a tree.
 A Warren Buffett corp. is currently ensnared in a bankruptcy. Likewise Icahn, Kravis, Apollo and many others have played the game.Thanks!
    Little Jon Stewart(?) is getting his ass kicked and you and all of his high priced writers know it! Don't panic Jon.
  Mark Cuban can't beat me at anything. He is one of many on Shark Tank and Apprentice has been a much, much bigger show!
 Jodi thought she outsmarted the system - it didn't work!  Congratulations to the jury on a job well done!  Now, will it be life or death?
 Man, we had a great day today at Trump Tower - lots of money was given to many people who really needed it - good feelings and happiness!
 Sorry losers and haters, but my I.Q. is one of the highest -and you all know it! Please don't feel so stupid or insecure,it's not your fault
 What do you think about the push to put women into high intensity combat situations?
 “Never think of learning as a burden. It may require some discipline, but it prepares you for a new beginning.”– Think Like a Champion
 I'm giving away money- go to  . Take it from me! Proud of the #FundAnything team.
 We continue to lose our nation’s finest in Afghanistan almost daily. The Rules of Engagement are costing lives.
 Scary. Our military is a using a Chinese made satellite for North Africa command communications 
 Visit  at  to see my picks! #FundAnything
 . discussing NYPD Chief Kelly’s great record & the launch of the crowdfunding site  http://someotherlink.com/
 Via  "Donald Trump gets into crowdfunding"  #FundAnything
 I just gave lots of money away at Trump Tower to people who needed it...they were very happy and appreciative!
 What a great time we just had in the atrium of Tump Tower for  The place was happy and packed!
 I gave away money. Go to  to see how I'm helping people. #FundAnything #Entrepreneurs
 It's go time! See you at Trump Tower. I'm giving money away! #FundAnything
  Thanks.
 People do not assume this but more than anything else, I like helping people. Be at Trump Tower at 11 AM today.
 Residential Capital, a company in which Warren Buffett is involved, went bankrupt - but that doesn't mean that Warren Buffett went bankrupt!
 I'm giving away money! 11AM Trump Tower. Be there or be left behind!
 I would absolutely kill Jon Stewart(?) in a debate - it would be no contest - he's not fast enough or smart enough (only obnoxious enough!).
    And Jon Stewart(?) is a very little man hiding behind lot's of high priced writers without which he would be nothing!
 Just watched Jon Stewart(?) jumping up and down and screaming like a madman - nothing funny or smart, just loud and obnoxious, a pushy dope!
    That's cool, I agree!
    Thanks Sonny!
    Thanks Chris!
    Thanks Bob, it is one of the best and will only get better-I will be spending lots of money this Summer!
 Wow, I love stimulating debate and driving certain people crazy-the Generals were forced to do something they didn't want to do (not me).
 Is it even slightly possible that Jodi Arias could be set free-wow, what a miscarriage of justice that would be!
 The jury in the Jodi Arias trial is, believe it or not, still out. You never know but such a long deliberation could be good for the defense
 The Generals and top military brass never wanted a mixer but were forced to do it by very dumb politicians who wanted to be politically C!
 26,000 unreported sexual assults in the military-only 238 convictions. What did these geniuses expect when they put men & women together?
 “Mistakes are always forgivable, if one has the courage to admit them.” -- Bruce Lee
 Everyone join me tomorrow at 11 AM in Trump Tower atrium.
 My  int. discussing business difficulties with ObamaCare & how it is stopping businesses from hiring 
 Trump  renovations are on schedule.  With such a massive project underway, I am watching closely.
 My  int. on Benghazi cover up, the ObamaCare mess & firing   on  
 The economy is broken. Entrepreneurship is being suppressed. See what I do Wednesday 11 AM at Trump Tower atrium.
 Tired of being bullied by the economy? I'm going to help people. Wednesday 11 AM at Trump Tower
 Keep Wednesday morning free. You will want to see this!
 26,000 sexual assaults or rapes reported in military last year-and that is just the number that is reported (many do not want to report).
 Sexual assault and rape in the Armed Forces is a Massive problem that nobody wants to talk about or do anything about-the big dark secret!
 Head of Air Force's anti-sexual assault unit arrested for sexual assault! It just seems that our Country is not what it used to be.
 . who I got to know very well during #CelebApprentice, can't carry  jock.
 Now  is also “concerned” about ObamaCare along with   Program may fold through its own doing.
 Benghazi was a massive cover up.
 Via  "Donald Trump to speak at Lincoln Day Dinner at The Showplace in Novi" 
 . is the last lady standing in All Star Celebrity  Watch out men, she’s sharp and tough.
 The Trump Organization is honored to be expanding our interests into Dubai. The golf course will be the top course in the Middle East.
 . was very impressive and is a great person. The All Star Celebrity  viewers loved her.
 Why is failed theater critic Frank Rich writing about politics for failing  doesn’t have a clue!
     Thanks Jerry!
 Enjoy Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9 - a really great episode!
 When written in Chinese, the word 'crisis' is composed of two characters. One represents danger and the other represents opportunity." JFK
 Looking forward to being the guest of honor at   Patriot's Award Gala Dinner in Washington, DC
 Time magazine should name David Pecker of American Media to be its top guy...but they are not smart enough to do that!
 As I’ve said many times before, Jon Stewart  is highly overrated.
 Jon Stewart  is a total phony –he should cherish his past—not run from it.
 If Jon Stewart is so above it all & legit, why did he change his name from Jonathan Leibowitz? He should be proud of his heritage!
 What’s funny about the name “F**kface Von Clownstick” -- it was not coined by Jon Leibowitz-- he stole it from some moron on twitter.
 Amazing how the haters & losers keep tweeting the name “F**kface Von Clownstick” like they are so original & like no one else is doing it...
 “Most people think small because most people are afraid of success, afraid of making decisions, afraid of winning” The Art of the Deal
 It's crunch time. This Sunday's All-Star Celebrity  task will separate the winners from the losers.
    Unlike you, stupid, I became a big stock market investor a couple of years ago because the dollar is going to hell & false low int.
 “Always get even. When you are in business, you need to get even with people who screw you.” – Think Big
 “How much money can you stand to lose? That’s how much risk you should assume.” –   Think Like a Billionaire
 Turn to QVC now to watch Melania - really good stuff!
 Why are some more concerned with granting terrorist rights than protecting innocent Americans?
 Our trade deficit is still on pace to be over $500B.  This is killing our manufacturing sector and sending jobs overseas.
 Obama’s goal of 1 million electric car sales is a little off, by over 910,000   $100B of our money wasted!
 Trump Int'l Puerto Rico spreads luxury residences, a world class golf resort & beach club across 1,000 acres 
 Call  today on   at 5 PM EST, say hello, and buy buy buy!
 My wife, Melania, will be on  today  5 PM selling really beautiful jewelry at a very low price. Perfect for Mother’s Day—call in!
   True!
    Thanks.
  Work really hard & think smart!
    Good point!
 With Boston terrorist cell widening in suspects, it's now clear that it was a mistake to read the bomber the Miranda warning so early.
 .  replaced  on  to increase ratings. It’s a shame Chris’ are even worse. Sad to see.
 All-Star Celebrity  is down to the five final contestants.  Getting fired now is when it really hurts!
 Jodi, if you're listening, MAKE A DEAL!
 Jodi should try but the Govt. should not make a deal - no jury could be dumb enough to let her off (but you never know, look at OJ & others)
 Jodi Arias has stated that she follows me on twitter so I really hate to be saying that she is guilty but sadly, she is as guilty as it gets
  - Jordan is great!
    Why do you follow me creepy stalker?
    When you get bored with others, you'll be back (and don't hurry).
    Stephen, that's right...and someone who is really smart!
    Great idea - did you see their list, a joke!
 Just took a look at Time Magazine-looks really flimsy like a free handout at a parking lot! The sad end is coming-just like Newsweek!
     I never knew but thanks for the compliment!
   A totally one sided documentary. Why weren't the police, detectives and prosecutors interviewed? City should not settle this case
    Why did they all sign confessions and how many people did they mugg that night in the Park? What about their criminal records?
 “Don’t let the fear of striking out hold you back.” – Babe Ruth
 Via  'Celebrity Apprentice' is Number 1 among ABC, CBS & NBC for its Second Hour from 10-11 p.m. 
 NBC terminates "The Chris Matthews Show" 
 Oil should not cost more than $40 a barrel.  Ideally it should be $25.  Cheap to produce and we protect the OPEC countries.
 ObamaCare is a disaster. Americans will see record increases in their premiums and inferior care services.
 Fracking poses ZERO health risks   In fact, it increases our national security by making us energy independent.
 Upstate New York is suffering with record unemployment. Fracking is the answer. Frack now and Frack fast!
 Via  on  "Trumps look at building 18-hole golf course on former Kluge estate in rural Virginia" 
 See story in The Scotsman re: wind turbines- 
 The people of Scotland are really starting to fight the ugly industrial wind turbines. See Press and Journal- 
 Wow, I just found out that in a major poll of its readers the   voted me #1 on the "power 100" list in NY......
 ....... I disagree, but it's still cool.
 Snow and freezing weather all over mid-section of Country. Global warming specialists better start thinking fast!
 Money is really cheap so this is a great time to buy a house-but be sure to lock in long term financing (without which don't buy).
 Housing prices are up in Feb over last Feb 9.3 per cent -remember, I told everyone two years ago to buy (but they will be going much higher)
        sarcasm dummy!
     is a great guy and a great competitor who is respected by all!
 Once again  has competed at a very high level on Celebrity All Star  He is a great competitor.
 1/5 households is on food stamps  We must do better. Americans need to have a work ethic.
 Just left news conference at  with  people love  
 Congratulations to Michael Jordan on his marriage over the weekend.
 . is the poor man's left wing  no ratings)!
   Thanks!
   Night loser!
      Dopey, I've won them all.
    I should have many Emmys for The Apprentice if the process were fair-in any event, it's not my day job.                    ,
    Windfarms destroy everything around them-very sad!
    Happy birthday!
    Great taste!
     Wrong, screen is too small-Samsung size is better.
    I agree, Modern Family sucks!
    Thank you!
     is a very dumb guy who just doesn't know it-his show is a critical and ratings disaster!
 Photo from a recent episode of  - saying those two famous words! 
 Afghan Leader Karzai has received tens of millions of dollars IN CASH from the U.S. Government- how stupidly is our Country being run?
 By Scotland officials canceling my local ad about how damaging wind turbines are- it became a much bigger story around the world. Great!
 Great photo with  and  from this week's  
   Thanks!
    Thanks!
  Keep dreaming!
 I just sent  a check of $20,000 for his charity, Children's Kawasaki Disease . He worked hard and deserves it.
 . Don't lie,  was #1 in all major demos at 10. Do not lie!
 . I'm in front of the camera and behind the camera- just looked at your picture, you'll never be in front of the camera!
 ‏. Perhaps one of the worst replacements in showbiz, once you went on it was over! Your taste sucks!
 .  Season 13, still #1 at 10PM in all key demos despite having to serve as our own lead in from 9-10. 11PM News loves Trump!
 .... but you only want to talk about 10 years later when I still win 10PM in all key demos.
 . I hear your filmography is "stacked" with failures.
 “Failed show  I have never heard of you and was told you are a loser-after reading your credits I have no questions about it!
 Next year  should be the comedian at the White House Correspondents’ dinner. The only problem is that... 
 The  White House Correspondents' dinner was so boring this year- I guess that’s because I didn’t attend(even... 
 I have a lot of  stock--- and I miss Steve Jobs. Tim Cook must immediately increase the size of the screen... 
 Just out-  was in first place in all demos during the 10PM hour in the ratings.
 Doing Fox and Friends at 7.00 A.M.  Hope you loved Apprentice last night.
 Did you agree with my decision? #CelebApprentice
 Mechanical dog is going to be trending tonight. #MechanicalDog #CelebApprentice
 Great boardroom. #CelebApprentice
 Do you agree with the client's decision? #CelebApprentice
 Maybe  should stick to words... vs. barking. He’s got a definite talent when he wants to use it. #CelebApprentice
 Great memory  #CelebApprentice
 Boardroom time- which team do you think had the best presentation? #CelebApprentice
 What did you think of  mechanical dog idea?
 Team Power+ Spielberg?  Let’s find out. #CelebApprentice
 . is right—Plan B has descended into a state of total chaos. #CelebApprentice
 . says  is a gem. I agree. We all agree. #CelebApprentice
 . feels he’s been abandoned by his team. Do you think so? #CelebApprentice
 Looks like Plan B is stuck with the mechanical dog.  has latched on and won’t let go. #CelebApprentice
 . doesn’t need instructions. Couch time is more fun. #CelebApprentice
 Do you think  will be able to “step up” as PM?  I know  is hoping so. #CelebApprentice
 Here’s  She &  make a terrific team as my advisors. #CelebApprentice
 We have the Final Six—and  is the last remaining member of Team Power. He’s done a great job. #CelebApprentice
     9?.  Thanks.
    Thanks.
  Rivers comes back in a big way tonight on Celebrity Apprentice - she is fantastic.  9 on NBC.
    You are a great looking guy who is really smart - you can do much better than your current girlfriend - she's nothing!
 I remember when the Apprentice became the number one show on T.V.  came up to me and thanked me on behalf of NBC  (Yankee Stadium)
 Marble mouth  asks "why do we think to have a successful eveving you have to have Donald Trump as your guest of honor?" BORING TOM
 Thanks for the tremendous support for my shirts, ties and suits at Macy's. They do great because of really high quality at a low price.
     Not me, I predicted the housing bubble and told people not to buy.  I now tell people it is a great time to buy
 The Time Magazine list of the 100 Most Influential People is a joke and stunt of a magazine that will, like Newsweek,soon be dead. Bad list!
  Very cool!
    Police records, signed confessions and more?
 What apology, didn't they go around beating the crap out of people and robbing them? Why did they all confess? Aren't police convinced?
  Dan-You are a great guy with a great family-amazing future!
  be doing On the Record With Greta Van Susteren tonight at 10 P.M. Greta is a Terrific person who really gets it!  (FOX).
   True!
  Thanks, everyone loves it.
  A one-sided piece of garbage--and I won--big success for Scotland!
  Wow!
  Thanks.
  Very true!
  I don't hate him but he made some really bad decisions.
  Much can be done and it would be easy!
  No, they have no guts.
  True!
 “Being true to yourself and your work is an asset. Remember that assets are worth protecting.” – Think Like a Champion
 Ignorance is inexcusable; it’s the surest way to fail. No acceptable reason exists for not being well informed.
 This Sunday’s All-Star Celebrity  features the return of   Sunday at 9 PM on  2 hours.
 “When you expect things to happen - strangely enough - they do happen.” - J. P. Morgan
 Often times being ‘innovative’ is simply putting together pre-existing elements into something new. Be resourceful & expect success.
 Get ready for fireworks… &  face off in the Board Room this Sunday on All-Star Celebrity 
 Does Bush’s library have a wing featuring Supreme Court Justice Jon Robert’s ObamaCare ruling? Roberts was his prize appointee!
 Just as I predicted, Iraq is deteriorating into utter chaos   The war was a waste. China is taking all the oil.
 The Boston terrorist thugs’ mother is also a radical.  I am sure she will be granted citizenship shortly.
 Looking forward to addressing   'Road to Majority Conference' on June 13th 
 Study your area of business. All business involves risk, but risk can be reduced when you learn everything you can about what you’re doing.
 Can   and  continue to co-exist? Find out on this Sunday’s Celebrity All-Star 
 To be in charge, you have to take responsibility, you have to instill confidence. It’s like being a conductor--set the tempo.
 MUST READ ARTICLE: “Immigration reform could be bonanza for Democrats”  Are the  &  suicidal?
 Do as I say, not as I do.The politicians who passed ObamaCare are now exempting themselves from the monstrosity 
 House Republicans should be doing everything possible to defund ObamaCare.  Instead Leadership is funding it 
  I certainly did--in spades.
  So true.
  I will, thanks!
 We need another Bush in office about as much as we need Obama to have a 3rd term.  No more Bushes!
 . continues to defend the billions it pissed away on ‘green energy’ failures  Your money was wasted.
 Dangerous. While Obama is cutting down our military, China has announced plans to build more aircraft carriers 
 After tearing W Bush down for 12 years, now the media loves him. Why not? He gave them Obama.
 Pervert Alert! Serial sexter  has promised to use twitter as a “tool.” Parents,make sure your children have him blocked.
 Weiner says many more pictures may be out there—this is just what NYC needs, a pervert Mayor.
 Via  “Trump’s $200M Old Post Office Project Gets Early Approval” 
 #TBT Do you believe- once upon a time Jon Stewart really liked me? From 2004. 
  I never went bankrupt, you dope!
  Maybe Obama?
 Wow, I’m at 2,200,000  followers but I’d love to get rid of the haters & losers—they’re such a waste of time!
 #TBT At the US Open Tennis Tournament with  see same hairstyle! 
  True, but the losers don't know that--thanks.
  That is true!
    No!
    Thanks--the haters & losers know that too.
 ...What is wrong with this story? Isn’t this just ridiculous? Terrible! #KathyBoudin
 ..and now holds an adjunct professorship at Columbia University. Boudin also received an academic laurel from NYU Law School...
 Former Weather Underground radical Kathy Boudin spent 22 yrs in prison for armored-car robbery that killed 2 cops & a Brinks guard...
    Thanks.
    Thanks.
   Wrong on all counts dopey-you forgot to say taller than me!
  You are so stupid!
   That is true.
    Wow, so nice! Thanks, I wish I could have met him.
    Work hard!
 . doesn’t have the finances or financial statement to build the hated windfarm in Aberdeen.
 .  had no answers at demonstration last night. It’s a failing company. Aberdeen windmills will destroy it.
 The sub-station in Blackdog is very dangerous on unregulated landfill—fire hazard!  
 The Council is concerned over the health & safety for the village of Blackdog w/ placement of sub-station.  
 The Council was shocked by the exuberance of the demonstration in Blackdog.  
 The entire village of Blackdog in Scotland protested to the Council last night about the ugly windmills.  
  True and thanks!
 “The aesthetic, the quality, has to be carried all the way through.”  - Steve Jobs
 I believe Lance Armstrong had death wish when he did interview w/Oprah—as I predicted, everybody is suing him, he’ll have nothing left
   See Trump Tower!
  That's true--they all ask!
 By rejecting my ad on ugly windmills &  faulty thinking on the “Lockerbie bomber” the ad is now on worldwide newscasts.
 Do executives at  know that the business of TV centers on viewers & ratings?  is #19 on cable  Sad.
 My  interview on   & my surprising TV career 
 Watch out. Champion  returns to the Boardroom as a judge in this week’s All-Star Celebrity  Don't cross her!
 Can someone explain to me how a Chechnyan permanent resident non-citizen in our country is planning Jihad while on welfare?
 Sen.  has announced his retirement. A major proponent of ObamaCare, Baucus now says it’s a ‘huge train wreck.’
 The Boston killer applying today for ObamaCare. He demands that medical bills be taken care of immediately. Does this include dental?
 As everybody knows, but the haters & losers refuse to acknowledge, I do not wear a “wig.” My hair may not be perfect but it’s mine.
 I promise you that I'm much smarter than Jonathan Leibowitz - I mean Jon Stewart  Who, by the way, is totally overrated.
  The Scotland golf course in Aberdeen is open & packed—really cool to see & many are saying the greatest golf course ever built.
  Very sad--thanks.
  Okay, please say hello to her for me.
  Sunday May 19th.
 The mother of the Boston killers (not suspects) says her boys are totally innocent and were set up-I can see the 14 year long defense now!
 Lance Armstrong just got sued by the Federal Government-they want their money back-I told you so! What was he thinking when he did that int?
 Scotland does not have free press, even when you are just stating the facts-it's crazy!
    Big pollution during manufacturing and building process!
   Great!
    They were viciously attacking other people in the Park-nice guys?
 I have many great people but also an amazing number of haters and losers responding to my tweets-why do these lowlifes follow-nothing to do!
    Thanks!
 The Central Park Five documentary  was a one sided piece of garbage that didn't explain the.horrific crimes of these young men while in park
   Victim never died so they would not have been given death penalty-but did you see what these "innocent" boys were doing?
    Perhaps, but the Country is in really big trouble!  I do love real estate though (and am seriously good at it).
    They devalue everything, stupid!
   like ugly, bird killing wind turbines!
 The Chinese talk of climate change and carbon footprint but don't clean up their factories-but they sell us the equipment to clean up ours!
 Wrong, used to be called global warming and when that name didn't work, they deftly changed it to climate change-because it's freezing!
    Wind turbines will quadruple your electric bills and destroy the value of your home. Lot's of chicken soup however-bird kill.
    No, the Chinese will make them!
 It was great to have  veterans George Ross and  back in the boardroom.  #CelebApprentice
 North Carolina’s most exclusive club,  features  designed golf course, which fronts the biggest lake in NC
 Will  be fully clothed in his mayoral ads?
 Sexting Pervert  has returned to twitter. Parents of all underage girls should BLOCK him immediately!
 Did the Boston terrorists register their guns? No. Another example of why gun control legislation is not the answer!
 The dying  circulation has “dropped” & its newsstand sales have “plummeted by 20.1 percent” 
 . don’t worry, my ad will be shown across the world--and it is highly accurate!
 This past Sunday’s All-Star Celebrity  continued to win the key demographic of adults 25-54. An amazing run!
 I’ve always been a fan of Steve Jobs, especially after watching Apple stock collapse w/out him – but the yacht he built is truly ugly.
 It’s freezing in New York—where the hell is global warming?
 “The object of war is not to die for your country but to make the other bastard die for his.” - Gen. George S. Patton
 In three years people won’t be building wind turbines anymore - they are obsolete & totally destroy the environment in which they sit.
    Yes!
 “Attitude is a little thing that makes a big difference.” - Winston Churchill
 If your enemies end up liking you it’s because they beat you.  You want their respect, not their friendship.
  Macy's ships to Canada! Just go to: 
 Next time you are waiting in an emergency room remember the Boston killer was rushed to intensive care within minutes of capture.
 Our enemy China is illegally buying oil from our enemy Iran  China loves it!
 Will Barack Obama personally read the Boston terrorist his Miranda Rights?
   Happy Birthday Mark.
 . survives another week of All Star Celebrity  Gary is shifty and playing to win.
 In light of Boston, immigration legislation will be much harder to get.
 Sorry to hear  was dead last, in the gutter, in their Boston bombing coverage   
   Great wife!
   Great!
 . did a great job on All Star Celebrity   Raised a lot of money for charity while looking great.
 The Boston killer will soon be asking for a Presidential pardon—don’t give it to him, Mr. President—hang tough!
 . int. on how the Boston thug deserves death penalty,  great work & firing Brande Roderick 
 The big problem for little  is that he’s going to have to have another hit song, not just his Donald Trump bonanza.
 . has over 79M hits on YouTube & just hit platinum with his Donald Trump song—screw you Mac!
  Thank you.
   Thanks.
  Los Angeles or Scotland!
 Spent the weekend in LA checking out Trump National Golf Club on the Pacific Ocean. An amazing place! 
  Savannah, work hard in school!
 Me, by a lot!
 Will be doing Fox and Friends at 7 A.M. (in 20 minutes).
    Yes we can oh foolish one, terrorists should not have the right to remain silent!
 My ties and shirts are doing very big numbers  beyond my wildest thoughts! Thanks  and the rest of the losers for mentions!
 What did you think of the boardroom? #CelebApprentice
 George also appeared on Saturday Night Live when I was guest host in 2004. A great time! #CelebApprentice
 George Ross and I have done some great real estate deals together. He’s a tough negotiator. #CelebApprentice
 Looking forward to  book of "Buseyisms"!
 Romance or Adventure- what do you prefer? #CelebApprentice
 For you newcomers, George Ross was one of my first advisors on the original Apprentice. #CelebApprentice
 “George has a real twinkle about him” says  Really? The shark should be scared. #CelebApprentice
 This assignment has been a challenge to both teams. #CelebApprentice
 This assignment has stretched not just the imaginations but the patience quotas of  and  #CelebApprentice
 George Ross could be right— would be better in the adventure task than the romance task. #CelebApprentice
 . isn’t excited about their ideas. Are you? #CelebApprentice
 . is making no attempt to help. Is he in BuseyLand? Their team is short on help already… #CelebApprentice
 How stressed are  and  already? #CelebApprentice
 I hope you are watching the Apprentice...tonight's show is great and Brett Michaels is back!
 Everybody loves  He’s a great champion and this is where he should be. He agrees!
 . and George Ross are back as advisors. Good to see them! #CelebApprentice
 . presents the NJ Coast Red Cross a $40,000 check for Sandy Relief. You can tell he’s very pleased about that--& rightly so.
 Seems like the teams are surprised when  comes back. #CelebApprentice
 What do you think of water boarding the Boston killer sometime prior to allowing our doctors to make him well? I suspect he may talk!
 Make the Boston killer talk before our doctors make him better. Once he is well he will say, "speak to my lawyers."
 Don't forget to watch Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9pm...you will love it!
 I don't know how Al Michaels could have been drunk and arrested on Friday night if he was totally sharp on Saturday morning.
 Great sportscaster Al Michaels, a friend of mine, played golf with me on Saturday morning at Trump National, LA. He was in perfect shape!
 If the Boston killer applies for Obama Care the paperwork will be too complicated for him to understand!
 NO MERCY TO TERRORISTS you dumb bastards!
 Can you imagine the Boston killer being lovingly tended to in a hospital room right next to his victims who lost their arms, legs and worse!
 Bullshit-Pop gave me knowledge and a relatively small amount of money (split between brothers and sisters) and I built it into over 9 bill.
   Tell me, what were they doing in the Park, playing checkers?
 Watch Gary B tonight on Celebrity Apprentice-some really crazy things happen!
 Getting back to the nicer and more normal parts of life, Celebrity Apprentice is great tonight on NBC at 9. It will be a full two hour show!
    Great!
 You are right, the media is always offending Donald Trump-they have no limits-but they will do anything not to offend the Boston killer!
 I know some of you may think l'm tough and harsh but actually I'm a very compassionate person (with a very high IQ) with strong common sense
 Didn't the Boston killer even run over his own brother with a car in order to get away?  We are not dealing with an innocent baby here-DEATH
 When the stupid people start feeling sorry for the Boston killer and want to release him and give him medals, remember the killings-maimings
 I hate when the news media, so afraid to offend anyone, always refers to the BOSTON KILLER as "the suspect".
 The shirts and ties at Macy's are so good-beautiful and do so well that guys like the one that sued me wrongly want a piece-l kicked his ass
 I just won a big Court decision (N.Y. Post) against some character who claimed I owed him licensing fees on success of my shirts and ties.
 Oh no, they are worried that they didn't read the Boston killer his rights and he may have a good legal argument. 12 year case to finish?  t
    Great going!
 Sorry,  the best and most beautiful ties and shirts made anywhere and at a really reasonable cost. Also, fragrance is amazing. GO TO MACY'S.
   That's great!
   Thanks!
 Great job by the FBI, Boston Police and all others involved-start the trial tonight!
 Is the Boston killer eligible for Obama Care to bring him back to health?
 Read my tweets you dopes-of course he should get a trial-but fast (not a 12 year disaster).
 You must be kidding-zero chance he is innocent!
 Should be public execution for all to see-you will end this bullshit fast!
 Get ALL the info,  then quick trial, then death penalty for the Boston killer of innocent children and people! Do not be kind.
 . should stop apologizing for the mistake they made the other day & get back to reporting!
 David Pecker would be a brilliant choice as CEO of TIME Magazine -- nobody could bring it back like David! 
  You've got it mixed up.  Chechnya is not the Czech Republic.
 Lots of comments—Do you really believe these two brothers operated alone without influence of others?
 The  police & others are doing an amazing job. How genius was it putting together that tape?
 These Tsarnaev brothers did not work alone. They had help and assistance from other cell members. Be vigilant and on the lookout.
 South African Tourism North America will unveil its new ad campaign “What’s Your BIG 5?” on All-Star  this Sunday.
 Another great shot from the beginning of construction at  
 With  and crew at the start of a new  
 Being tough doesn’t mean being nasty, difficult, or unreasonable. It means being tenacious and refusing to give in or give up.
 “Sometimes people spend too much time focusing on problems instead of focusing on opportunities.” – Think Like A Champion
 Pervert alert! Sexter Anthony Weiner will be running for Mayor of New York City.
 #TBT With  almost 35 years ago- 
 Featuring top spa in New York, AAA Five-Diamond Award  is Soho’s most elite hotel & destination spot 
  Great, thanks.
  Hi Dan and good luck!
   We need someone!
  Great!
 Amazing!  Watch  fans take over National Anthem during pregame ceremonies 
 “One reason many people do not do well in business is because they do not do well with people.” – Midas Touch
 The reality is that no gun bill will ever stop tragedies.  And as we have learned from ObamaCare, Washington only makes things worse!
  Thank you.
    Thanks Joe!
   Interesting and true.
 Everyone loves  here she is with  and me. 
 Thinking small when you could think big limits you in all aspects of your life.
 W/ spectacular panoramic Pacific Ocean views,  is the top luxury public golf course in the country 
 Obama’s $1T+ deficit budget expanded welfare & green cronyism & it cut domestic bomb prevention in half 
 Druggie A-Rod,  biggest fraud, is lucky George Steinbrenner is no longer with us.   would have voided his contract.
   Great!
  Thanks.
 It is terrible that neither Obama, Biden nor Kerry attended Lady Thatcher’s funeral. They would all run to Muslim Brotherhood Morsi’s.
 Business is easy. Dealing with people is hard. If you are an entrepreneur, your most important job is to choose who works with you.
 Our gov't is so pathetic that some of the billions being wasted in Afghanistan are ending up with terrorists 
 The Chinese must still be laughing at Kerry’s trip to China.  He got nothing, gave them everything and promised even more.
 Had a fantastic time at yesterday’s All-Star  press conference with  in 
  Thanks.
 Great to see  win big yesterday. Good for Boston and the country. Yesterday we were all  fans.
  Well, I would make America great again.
  Flattery!
   Thanks.
   Wrong--he started it, I finished it!
  Thank you.
   Thanks.
  Our country needs a negotiator--we are failing fast!
  Thanks.
 I discuss yesterday's tragedy at the Boston Marathon in today's video blog. 
 With  earlier today at  press conference in  
  Thank you.
   Thanks.
   Thank you.
 I sure hope the sexting pervert Anthony Weiner runs for mayor.  Will be great fun watching him both lose and be humiliated.
 Via  “Climate changing for global warming journalists” by Lawrence Solomon (cont) 
 Vegas’ top destination,  is a 64-story tower of golden glass  What goes on there, stays there!
 Negotiation is persuasion more than power. Be reasonable and flexible, and never let anyone know exactly where you’re coming from.
 . RT  I live in Aberdeenshire & I'm with you, you have made a big difference to that bit (cont) 
 . RT  This time I agree 100% I never knew how useless a wind turbine was until I (cont) 
 .  RT 
   Yes.
 The world economy is under deep stress with growth slowing everywhere.  Yet crude is over $87/barrel. Should be $25 at the most.
 Congratulations to   & all emergency first responders & doctors for their excellent work under fire yesterday
 Via  “Donald Trump hires top lawyer for wind farm battle” 
 Throwing out the first pitch a few years ago at Fenway in Boston- Boston will be better than ever. 
 Via  Ratings Sunday 'Family Guy' & 'The Simpsons' Down, 'All-Star Celebrity Apprentice' Up” 
   I know Adam--he's a great player & great guy!
 It’s very sad that the administration isn’t sending anyone to Margaret Thatcher’s funeral. She was a big U.S. supporter.
  Very nice--thanks.
    .
  Macy's will be happy--and so am I.
  It might but there'd be "hell to pay!"
  You will love it!
    Thanks.
     I was not thrilled but left them in because the show is real.
 I’ve known  for a long time & sadly, he gets dumber each & every year--& started from a very low base.
 .  Did you forget about Bill Ayers & so many others? You should apologize to all the people you offended yesterday.
 . must have the lowest IQ on television—now telling people that domestic terrorists are from the right.
 We must change the laws of our land and seek fair but rapid trials for the perpetrators of terrorist acts (Boston) with harsh punishment!
 My heart goes out to the people of Boston on this terrible day!
 . is impressing the All Star Celebrity  viewers with her continued success on Team Power.
 Despite firing  in last night's All Star Celebrity  Stephen had strong overall performance this season
 In case you missed it, my  interview on Obama's IRA rate cut hurting savings & economic growth 
 My  interview re:  pregnancy, my grandchildren, Obama's 18% tax rate & Obamacare 
 From 10-11 pm,  ranks #1 in 18-49 among ABC,CBS, and NBC. #CelebApprentice
 .  and  with   -- Great shot! 
 Will be doing Fox and Friends in two minutes!
 Do you think I made the right decision? #CelebApprentice
 Who do you think is going home? #CelebApprentice
 The home of the boardroom-   #CelebApprentice
 Product integration is very important. #CelebApprentice
 I’m impressed -- both teams have produced very entertaining silent films. #CelebApprentice
 Great shots of  #CelebApprentice
 Do you know how many years  starred on Taxi? #CelebApprentice
 What is your favorite  film? Tonight's short film? Point Break? Lethal Weapon? #CelebApprentice
 It's boardroom time! Does anyone miss  #CelebApprentice
 . and  arguments are making the edit room look like the boardroom. #CelebApprentice
 Based on the shoots- which silent film do you think will be better? #CelebApprentice
 . doesn’t like  cliché line and Stephen says Penn creeps him out. Do we sense conflict yet? #CelebApprentice
 What would you choose- Vampires or Cavemen? #CelebApprentice
 “A vampire with a day pass?”  We are in  land. #CelebApprentice
 . as Project Manager... is Team Power in trouble?? #CelebApprentice
 It’s true— gets the comeback of the year award. I didn’t like having to fire him. #CelebApprentice
 A lot of comments re  vs. Milania last week. I think spelling has taken on a new significance. #CelebApprentice
 Get ready to turn to NBC for CELEBRITY APPRENTICE -- TONIGHT'S SHOW IS GREAT!
  - I am really proud of you Adam - I'll see you soon at Trump National Doral!
 Great job  - you deserve it!
 Make sure to watch Celebrity Apprentice tonight at  9 on NBC. A GREAT SHOW, JUST LIKE THE MASTERS.   9
  is a great guy and player!
  Good luck!
 Remember, save your evening to watch Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9 - increased to a full two hours - great episode - watch Gary B.
 South Korea must in some form pay for our help-the U.S. must stop being stupid!
 China will extract much from Secretary Kerry and the U:S. in order for them to help us with the North Korea problem-don't let this happen!
 Did A Rod really try to buy the papers that would implicate him re. drugs - wow, that would be the end, a disaster!
   Also true!
 Remember, NBC increased Celebrity Apprentice to 2 hours starting this Sunday night at 9 P.M. through end of season-great news for App lovers
 Bad break for  a great shot which hits the pin and kicks into the water-gets a bogey on hole with another great shot-Champ!
 What a shame that Kobe Bryant was so badly injured last night - a truly great champion who brought the Lakers back from oblivion this year!
 Ridiculous that they gave the 14 year old golfer from China a one stroke penalty for slow play at The Masters(see, I can stick up for China)
 I am on David Letterman tonight.
  China will only rule if we let them--or are stupid.
  I only speak the truth.
 Our country should be worried about nuclear control far more than gun control--& that one's not even close!
 I talk about Obamacare in today's #TrumpVlog- 
   Thanks.
  Turbines will kill more birds than hunters.
   True!
  Thanks, very nice.
       Turbines destroy environments and people.
   True.
 Remember to take time this weekend to relax and regroup. It will pay major dividends for the next week.
 My performance from last week on David Letterman  will be re-aired tonight at 11:35 PM on CBS.
 Always remember that as your success grows, you will be asked for more favors. Learn how to say ‘No.’ It is critical.
 “Be up front and direct with people, and they will return the favor.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 Where is the President?  It is time for him to come on TV and show strength against the repeated threats from North Korea -- and others.
 The only American who has met with the North Korean man child is Dennis Rodman.  Isn’t that frightening and sad?
 China controls North Korea. So now besides cyber hacking us all day, they are using the Norks to taunt us.  China is a major threat.
 .   RT ‏
 .   RT  - one would think the photo & caption - says it all.... 
 . is Hawaii’s top luxury hotel & destination. Each room features stunning views & superb amenities 
 All eyes are on    He’s in good position!
 . RT   Driving through Indiana and seeing tons of ugly windmills. Now I know what  is talking about
 . has increased  to 2 hours until the end of the season--full 2 hour episodes starting at 9 PM EST
 Via  "Trump empire planning to build a presence in Sydney" 
 Don't talk to me about Bush, I was never a defender or a fan!
 I can't believe we are not asking South Korea for anything. They make a fortune on us while we spend a fortune defending them-how stupid!
  Thank you.
    Thanks.
    I hope so!
  Probably Mark.
 “Interested is interesting. If you remember that simple rule, you will have no trouble making conversation.”- Think Like a Billionaire
 Mr. President, it is time to lead on the Korean crisis.  Make a statement from the Rose Garden and send a strong message to the man child!
 Obama’s budget spends $2B making our navy ships algae-powered  The strong world is laughing at us.
 #TBT    and I 20 years ago- 
 The time has come. THEGaryBusey will be project mgr on this Sunday's All-Star Celebrity  MUST SEE TV!!! Back to 2 hrs.
 .   Greatly appreciate your nice words re WrestleMania. That’s why you are such a respected writer.
 I really liked everyone at the  Hall of Fame ceremony--fantastic people!
 Congratulations to  on winning their first Atlantic Division title since 1994.  is a great New Yorker and Knick!
 Congratulations to  and Jared on the big news.  I will have yet another grandchild this fall!
 Opportunities only present themselves if you are out there looking for them.  Be aggressive and seize them when they come.
 “Go for the jugular so that people watching will not want to mess with you.” – Think Big
 .   RT   Margaret Thatcher NEVER would have allowed those wind mill monstrosities.
    Wonderful news, thanks.
  True!
    Thanks.
  True!
  I will be there soon!
  Not much, it's too easy!
 I feel so badly for Mark Cuban-the Dallas Mavericks were just eliminated from the playoffs and his partners are pissed. Very sad!
   Great!
   Great!
   Thanks and say hi to your son!
   Thanks!
 “You cannot push anyone up the ladder unless he is willing to climb.” - Andrew Carnegie
 . Kevin Youkilis is off to a terrific start. He’s less than half the price and a much better player than a drug free A-Rod.
 Sexual pervert Anthony Weiner has zero business holding public office.
 “Success breeds success. The best way to impress people is through results.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 The $200M renovations at Trump  are right on target.  When completed, the course will be as good as it gets.
 Obama’s proposed budget has another middle class tax hike  Enjoy!
 “Donald Trump Wishes Kristen Stewart A Happy Birthday”  via 
 I discuss South Korea in today's all new #TrumpVlog - 
   Thank you!
  Thanks--and good luck.
     Thanks!
      Thanks!
 My  interview w/  discussing her debut on  & her skin care line 
 I hope everyone (especially the haters and losers) goes to Macy's today and buys some DJT ties, shirts and suits-and SUCCESS Fragrance-love!
 Sorry losers and haters, but I LOVED the great energy in Madison Square Garden during my speech. The WWE thought it was incredible - it was!
 Why did Vince and the WWE give my speech and segment the most time last night on USA Network - because that's what people want to see!
   Thanks!
 
 
  
 
  
 
 With fellow inductees in front of the sold out crowd at MSG. #WWEHOF 
 Class of 2013. #WWEHOF 
 Talking with  backstage-  #WWEHOF
 What a great group!  With   and  #WWEHOF
 Fellow inductee  and me. #WWEHOF 
 Here I am with  #WWEHOF 
 Watching  get inducted from the sold out crowd. #WWEHOF. 
 Family group shot. #WWEHOF 
 Another one of me on stage. #WWEHOF 
 Making my speech. #WWEHOF 
 Vince McMahon shows the crowd one of the greatest moments in WWE History. #WWEHOF 
 Always nice to see the terrific  at the #WWEHOF. 
 Watching the show. #WWEHOF 
 . was terrific. #WWEHOF 
 Yea, NBC has increased all remaining Celebrity Apprentice episodes to two hours starting at 9 P.M. on Sunday!  Amazing show.
 In today's all new #TrumpVlog I discuss what a great honor it was to be inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame. 
 Watch me get inducted into the #WWEHOF tonight at 10PM on USA. I will be posting exclusive behind the… 
 It was great seeing  at the #WWEHOF. 
 “"Pennies don't fall from heaven, they have to be earned here on earth." – PM Margaret Thatcher (October, 13 1925 – April, 8 2013)
 It’s Tuesday, how much has China stolen from us today through cyber espionage?
    Thanks Eddie I really appreciate your nice words!
  Thanks!
 Follow me on Instagram- 
 Here I am with  and erictrump presenting the WGC  Trophy to Tiger Woods at… 
 I just left  in Charlottesville,Virginia --- it is the finest in the country--- really incredible!
 Don't negate your own power. Whatever you've been dealt, know you can deal with it. Fear is the opposite of faith.
 Think positively. There are always opportunities. Keep your focus and don't give up!
 The new reality. ‘China Daily’ is sold in street newspaper vending machines across DC. Why not? They own the place.
 Margaret Thatcher was the Iron Lady of the West. She promoted freedom & democracy---a great leader & ally of America.
 I am very impressed by  His return to this season’s   showed who Dennis really is--which is very good.
 My  interview re: the dismal job report, getting ripped off by South Korea, 2016 election &  #WWEHOF 
 Thanks  is an amazing guy.
 . interview re: North Korea, firing  job report,  debut &  
 . just finished being on  any standard, she was great!
   Have a happy one!
 . will be on  today at 11am ET discussing  #celebapprentice & her  skin care collection. Tune in!
 I’m a star maker- Adrian has continued to receive many fans in  and  is definitely on the map! #CelebApprentice
 The boardroom and  I'm watching great entertainment tonight! #CelebApprentice
 What do you think so far? #CelebApprentice
 It appears that  is entranced with  and rightly so! #CelebApprentice
 . and  as PM’s- I’m proud of Dennis and his performance this season. #CelebApprentice
 The #CelebApprentice post  Will it ever be the same?
 My wife, the beautiful  will be appearing… #CelebApprentice
 I’m at  tonight but will be doing a few tweets. I know the episode well.... #CelebApprentice
 Dennis Rodman is a project manager tonight on Celebrity Apprentice - watch Dennis in full action!
  is great tonight and stars the legendary beauty  who reveals her great skin care collection. 
 :   When we have people eating out of trash cans in this country, we have no business helping any other country"
 Starting next week, and by popular demand (plus good ratings) NBC will broadcast only two hour episodes of Celebrity Apprentice at 9 P.M.
 Celebrity Apprentice is rebroadcasting last weeks episode at 9 P.M. WITH A GREAT NEW EPISODE FEATURING  TRUMP AT 10 P.M. - AMAZING!
 My induction last night at Madison Square Garden into the WWE Hall of Fame was amazing-I met some great people, including Bruno.
 True, America is rapidly losing it's SPIRIT, and when that's gone, we will only be going in one direction - and that direction is down!
 China is pushing North Korea!
 When is South Korea going to start paying us for the massive amounts of money we are spending to protect them from the North?
 Our President must be very careful with the 28 year old wack job in North Korea. At some point we may have to get very tough-blatant threats
  Lili will call you - thanks and good luck!
 I'm getting ready to be inducted tonight into the WWE Hall of Fame at Madison Square Garden - a great honor for me and the Trump family!
   Great going Ricardo!
 I am doing On the Record With Greta Van Susteren at 10 P.M. on Fox. We will be talking about the bad economy and other subjects of interest!
 Spent full day with contractors at Trump National Doral - it will be amazing! 
   Original schedule but going back to two hours.
   Starting next week the show increases to 2 hours.
  Either is great.
  Wow!
   Thank you.
  Great, good luck.
   Thanks Mark.
 I will be On The Record with Greta Van Susteren  tonight at 10 PM on Fox News.
  Thanks Basil.
   Okay--hi Maria!
    Four.
  Thanks Traci. Hi to your son.
 “The great question is not whether you have failed, but whether you are content with failure.” - Laurence J. Peter
 Sunday night at 9 PM EST will be re-run of last week's episode of Celebrity  followed by new episode at 10 PM.
 This Sunday’s All-Star Celebrity  has the most beautiful boardroom judges ever w/  &  together!
 Only 88,000 jobs were added this past March. Prediction was 190,000. Businesses can’t expand with Obama Care & high taxes on horizon.
 ...Who says the death penalty is not a deterrent?
 James Holmes, the Aurora, Colorado guy who killed 12 people & injured 58 others, is fighting hard to avoid the death penalty...
 Tell me, which is “cooler”—my induction into the  Hall of Fame or my Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame?
 Very exciting—tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden I get inducted into the  Hall of Fame.
 Jobs report is really bad - beyond the worst projections.A bad day on Wall Street!
 Word is spreading that I got a tattoo - no way, I am not a fan!
 North Korea can't survive, or even eat, without the help of China. China could solve this problem with one phone call-they love taunting us!
 I have gotten to know many Spanish speaking people as the owner of Trump National  Doral in Miami. They are smart, hard working and great
 Your work will never be in vain if you work for a cause that is greater than yourself.
 . just awarded Trump Vineyard’s Sparkling Reserve 91 points --- the highest rated wine in Virginia... 
 Looking forward to  inducting me into  Hall of Fame this Saturday in  #WWEHOF #WrestleMania
 I have a gift for my loyal viewers of All-Star  Mrs.  debut on this week’s episode 
 Remember, Celebrity Apprentice  tonight  on CNBC at 9. Amazing episode - watch Omarosa get the boot!
 Negotiation: Think about what the other side wants. Know where they’re coming from. Don't underestimate them. Create a win/win situation.
 Re: Negotiation: View any conflict as an opportunity. Be a diplomat as much as possible.
 Look for good ideas outside of your own areas of expertise. Find innovations, approaches, and practices that you could adapt in your field.
 Now AP is banning the term "illegal immigrants" What should we call them? 'Americans'?! This country's political press is amazing!
 Obama just bought the Afghan Police $288M in ammo   Make no mistake,  some of these will be shot at our troops.
 The purpose of China’s massive military buildup on the Nork’s border is to intimidate us. China attacked us during the Korean War.
 “Relax & clear your mind if someone is speaking, so that you’re receptive to what they’re saying.” – Roger Ailes, You are the Message
 Video in honor of the 100th Anniversary  of the Anti-Defamation League (ADL):  “Imagine a World Without Hate” 
 We should look to China where big time pollution takes place as they manufacture inefficient and costly wind turbines for Scotland!
 The haters and losers that assume I was a non-athlete and know nothing about coaches should look into my past-unlike our President-open book
 I played football and baseball, sorry, but said to be the best bball player in N.Y. State-ask coach Ted Dobias-said best he ever coached.
 The basketball coach at Rutgers looks bad but I had a coach who made him look like a baby - coaches can be tough!
 Celebrity Apprentice on tonight - CNBC at 9
 Another freezing day in the Spring - what is going on with "global warming"?  Good move changing the name to "climate change" - sad!
  sucks - very bland and boring with no future or hope - just like  (and many others).
 I ask again, how much is very wealthy South Korea paying the United States for protecting it against North Korea?
 I think it was terrible that Tim Cook of Apple apologized to China. What the hell is he apologizing for? Steve Jobs wouldn’t.
 In this time of economic turmoil where millions of Americans are unemployed, our tax dollars are paying  big  salary!
 . is a liberal hack whose career is being laid to rest   Here Moyers coddles  
 Via  "Trump Releases Renderings For Old Post Office Building" 
 I look forward to Saturday night and being inducted into the  Hall of Fame.
 The Yuan hit another record high against the Dollar. China is laughing at our expense.
 China has control over North Korea!
 With the impending crisis in Korea, is it a big confidence builder that Chuck Hagel is Sec. of Defense? Elections have consequences.
 With Dr. Dror Paley & Dr. Ben Carson with two wonderful children at Mar-a-Lago. 
 Bob & Suzanne Wright, co-founders of   have done an absolutely fantastic job—two real winners. 
 Be passionate. If you love what you're doing, success will follow.
 Set the bar high, do the best you possibly can, and believe in yourself—because if you don’t, no one else will either.
 In the 10:30 PM ET lead-in to local news,  delivered a 31 percent margin of victory...
 ... among ABC, CBS and NBC in the key news demo of adults....
 ..."Apprentice" was #1 among ABC, CBS and NBC from 10:30-11 p.m. in all key demos (adults, men and women 18-34, 18-49 and 25-54)- Nielsen.
 The  should immediately stop paying A-Rod—he signed his contract without telling them he was a druggie.
 A-Rod’s salary is more than the entire  Half the players on  will have better seasons than him. A-Rod is a joke!
 Are you expanding your business? Interview returning soldiers. Give them strong consideration. Their sacrifices deserve it.
 Sacrificing our nation’s bravest for  ungrateful Iraqis = great for China. China is taking majority of the oil 
 . &  “Vaccine court awards millions to two autistic children damaged by vaccine” 
 The only place where our "border" is protected is from Europeans. We educate them in our finest institutions & then have them deported.
 Immigration reform is all risk for the  Their base doesn’t want it and the 12M illegals will all vote Democrat.
 Today The Blue Monster is torn up. The Trump National  is being revolutionized with $200M of renovations.
  Hi.
 Via  "Trump warns GOP moving too fast on immigration reform"   by 
 Via  " gets fired from 'Celebrity    Watch   tomorrow on 
 “Winning is the most important thing in my life, after breathing. Breathing first, winning next.” -
  Archive:“DONALD TRUMP'S GREATEST  MOMENTS”  When I shaved  McMahon's head in  XXIII
 My  interview on risk  for  on immigration, wasting money in Middle East & firing  
 “All-Star Celebrity Apprentice” is #1 in the time period among ABC, CBS and NBC in 18-49 and all other key demos—Nielsen Ratings
 . insane release of the terrorist—for humanitarian reasons--will go down as a better decision..
 ... than his destruction of Scotland’s magnificent lands.
 . , the Scottish politician who released the terrorist who blew up Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie…
 … is now looking to cause irreparable environmental damage with wind turbines. 
 In standing by  I was  also representing many people who have addiction problems & are working hard to come back.
 It was my great honor to defend  on  last night—he has come a long way and for the good!
   Good luck.
 . regularly features  contestants on his show. We love his support & he’s a terrific host.Tonight: Omarosa.
 Will be doing Fox and Friends in 10 minutes at 7.05 - enjoy!
 Adrian was recognized on a Disney cruise and has had many photo requests in  We have a new celebrity! #CelebApprentice
 Great boardroom! What did you think? #CelebApprentice
 What do you think  is writing? #CelebApprentice
 . continues to do important work for  Children’s Research Hospital. I am very proud of  philanthropy.
 . has received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame— about time! #CelebApprentice
 Whose artwork was your favorite— and what team do you think will win? #CelebApprentice
 Piers truly hates Omarosa!
 Ever see  in performance? They’re fantastic. And so are Penn & Teller. Don’t miss them. #CelebApprentice
 Agreed--  says he and  have a “communication malfunction.” #CelebApprentice
 . take on  seems to be a classic love-hate combo. Piers can be tough and everyone knows it. #CelebApprentice
 Now he has made his Busey-ism into a song. #CelebApprentice
 . and one of his Busey-isms:  “Art is only the search, it is not the final form.” #CelebApprentice
 . is back! Did I see  wince? #CelebApprentice
 Read about how this hotel came into being in my book “Never Give Up”—it’s quite a story. #CelebApprentice 
 . on CPW in NYC is the home of the globe that has become an icon in the city. #CelebApprentice
 . judgment wasn’t the best in who she chose to come back to the boardroom—that was her demise. #CelebApprentice
 Are people really afraid of  Would you be? #CelebApprentice
 What will happen to Omarosa tonight? One of our all time great episodes!
 I hope everyone, or rather almost everyone, had a GREAT EASTER! We need our leaders to make great and wise decisions in these troubled times
 So, what will happen to the Big O on Celebrity Apprentice tonight. Remember, I only fire people when it is deserved, not for other reasons!
 BIG NIGHT on Celebrity Apprentice tonight. IMPORTANT, starts at 10 P.M. as scheduled but NBC just increased all future episodes to 2 hours!
 Have a GREAT EASTER, I love you all!
 No, I'm saying that the World is paying the price for China's pollution while they make a fortune with their dirty factories! Very sad.
 Major article in New York Times today discusses the cost of environmental damage in China and how it is RAPIDLY GROWNG! Rest of World pays.
 China is the biggest environmental polluter in the World, by far. They do nothing to clean up their factories and laugh at our stupidity!
 We have tremendous economic power over China if our leaders knew how to use it, which they don't! China's economy would collapse without us.
 What do we get from our economic competitor South Korea for the tremendous cost of protecting them from North Korea? - NOTHING!
 North Korea is reliant on China. China could solve this problem easily if they wanted to but they have no respect for our leaders.
    Not recent, long term support for the autism community.
   Thank you GLN!
 Current  really sad, not only boring but highly inaccurate. Use better paper product - looks like a death march (which it is!).
 Have a great Good Friday and a Happy Easter.
 Find out who and what is the best in your field. Identify the trendsetters, leaders and authorities. Learn the standards they follow.
 Achievers go for the challenge, so the next deal is what they're thinking about. They have an obligation to best themselves.
 Wisdom comes as a result of both experience and knowledge. It's something you can't teach someone else--you have to achieve it on your own.
 This week’s All-Star Celebrity  features another memorable Board Room rumble between  & 
 Everybody should contribute & fight in the long haul battle against autism.  
 Take the time to be thorough in whatever you undertake. Remain open to new ideas. Remain fluid, not fixed, in your expectations.
 Please help  with their petition to the White House for a national strategy for the autism epidemic 
 We blow up the famous Blue Monster at Trump National Doral on.Monday in order to build a spectacular new, bigger, and better Blue Monster!
  - New York Magazine sucks - lifeless and dead - one of the most boring out there. Get it now, it won't last long!
 Thanks for all the nice comments about the  last night. I enjoyed it and David enjoyed the ratings.
 Adam Moss, editor in chief of  is quickly losing his reputation in that  has become so boring and so irrelevant.
 Employees of  should have their resumes updated. It is very boring & will die in the near future. How much are they losing now?
 Terrible economic numbers released today. US GDP only grew 0.4% during Oct-Dec 2012 quarter  Great news for China.
 ...At the same time, go through a worst-case scenario but keep it short.  Focus on your goal—look at the solution, not the problem.
 Practice positive thinking—this will keep you focused while weeding out anything that is unnecessary, negative or detrimental...
  Thanks Anthony.
  True and thanks.
  My father, Fred C. Trump.
  I will.
  That's great--good luck.
  Great--enjoy!
 Rambling and stumbling  is as dumb as a rock!
 Trump Signature mattress is from Serta - the best there is! Thanks
 Going on Letterman now - let me know what you think - how did I do?  Here we go!
     Thanks!
    
 .  RT  just sitting here looking out over Aberdeen bay. These clowns cannot be allowed...
 ... to build a wind farm and destroy this view!
 .  RT   im proud to be scottish, but bonnie scotland will soon be a thing of the past w/ these windmills
 .  RT   Ask our Canadian neighbors who abhor the windfarms.  And poor Scotland
  Blackdog folks are very smart--their home values & lives will be destroyed.
   I hope so!
   Fantastic food--thanks.
  Thanks-- is great!
   Hope I do well!
  Great! Thanks.
 Getting ready to do the David Letterman   tonight—I hope you all will watch—I think!
 Aberdeenshire coast is spectacular. Its historic value & wildlife will be tarnished if these wind turbines are built--but they won't be!
 To all journalists, look into the financial dealings of Scottish Parliament members with Vattenfall…Follow the money.
 Less than two weeks until   XXIX.   v.  willbe epic! Excited to be inducted into the Hall of Fame.
 . continues to do important work for  Children’s Research Hospital. I am very proud of  philanthropy.
   Yes--and thanks.
  Thanks Bobby.
  Thanks--and good luck!
   Thank you.
  Kate--All my best wishes to you.
   Interesting and often true!
 . is an extraordinary entertainer & magician whose star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame is long overdue. Very proud of him.
 Congrats to fantastic All-Star  celebrity & illusionist  on being honored at 2013 Hollywood Walk of Fame!
 Via  "Oakland County High Schoolers Have Chance to Win $1,000 Scholarship & Meet Donald Trump" 
 Last night's  's interview by  of gorgeous 2012     Great job!
 In case you missed it, last week's  interview  with  discussing Tiger Woods & much more 
 The developer of the Scottish wind monstrosities, Vattenfall, just laid off 2,500 people & has serious financial difficulties.
 General Petraeus should stop apologising and get on with his life. He is a good man and should have a great future.
 The new selection of ties, shirts and suits at Macy's is amazing - also available in Trump Tower lobby.
 I'm doing The David Letterman Show tonight -should be interesting!
    Great - call me, we'll get you on!
 Great piece on Extra tonight re. Celebrity Apprentice!
 Sometimes we do things to build up experience and stamina to prepare, but it's to prepare us for something bigger.
 Many of  ‘friends’ were quick to abandon him in his time of crisis. Now Tiger knows who he can count on.
 Many people look at successful people & don't see anything but the end result. They don't see all the work that went into getting there.
 When somebody challenges you, fight back -- be tough!
 When someone can discourage you, you probably aren't determined enough. Be resolute. That's what it takes to get things done.
 FLASHBACK: “Hiding evidence of global cooling”   “Scientific data” is cooked!
 Via  "Trump joins with Chandler in bid to attract events" 
   This is from someone who knows they are a disaster.
 Via  "Donald Trump warns of ‘dangerous precedent’ in Cyprus bank skimming" 
 ...and now Alex Salmond pushes ugly turbines!
 FLASHBACK: “Alex Salmond pleaded with Donald Trump to back release of Lockerbie bomber”   ...
 The off shore Aberdeen wind farm site is “experimental” & has no track record delivering energy.  
 The Scottish windfarm was conceived by the same mind that released terrorist al-Megrahi for humanitarian reasons. ..
 …al-Megrahi  was the man who blew up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
  Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles.
  Great--good luck.
  Thank you!
 The radar, defense, shipping and civil aviation problems will stop the ugly windfarm. #EOWDC
 The windfarm approval in Scotland is subject to many conditions that can never be met - will be tied up in courts for years! #EOWDC
 . has made a truly great comeback - he is number one again! Give him credit, comebacks are tough to do. Way to go Tiger.
 For all of my many Jewish friends, Happy Passover.
 Good Morning America weather headline for U.S. - "NEVER ENDING COLD"
    Very good Joel!
 “Strive for wholeness and keep your sense of wonder intact, & you will find yourself ready for a grand slam.” - Think Like A Champion
 After decades of our leaders allowing China to steal our jobs & R&D, the Chinese will ‘overtake America’ in 2016 ...
 ...Re: China--I told you that a long time ago. 
 China’s top academics are working w/ PLA in cyber-espionage of our state secrets & R&D  They are laughing at us!
 Obama has now become the weakest POTUS against China, yuan just hit record high against dollar   Very sad!
 “Luck does not come around often. So when it does, be sure to take full advantage of it, even if it means working hard." Think Big
 I hope everyone enjoyed Palm Sunday!
  Thank you.
  Thanks, I appreciate it.
   Thanks Chuck.
 Even the liberal CRS is now reporting Obama Care will cause 200% premium increases   Surprised? 
 Cyprus is seizing private bank accounts as collateral for €10bn bail-out. We owe $17T. Think it can’t happen here?
  You may be right!
     Watch next week!
  2 decades in the conservative movement and look where the conservatives are now--you're fired!
   Very nice, thanks.
  Thank you Nadine!
    She is a fabulous woman!
   Thanks Jennifer.
 “Donald Trump to visit metro Detroit in May”  via 
 UK is freezing through longest & coldest winter in over 50 years  Where’s the global warming? 
 They changed the name from “global warming” to “climate change” after the term global warming just wasn’t working (it was too cold)!
 It’s springtime and it just started snowing in NYC. What is going on with global warming?
 Uh oh…  &  once again reunite in the Board Room in next week’s ‘All-Star’   Fireworks!
 Via  "Trump at CPAC: What Really Happened " 
 Last night’s All-Star  once again showed why the ultimate onus lies with the project manager. The buck stops there.
 What did you think of my decision? #CelebApprentice
 Adrian also gives autographs if you stop by the lobby of  #CelebApprentice
 That’s Adrian in the elevator— he works at  & he’s got a lot of stories. #CelebApprentice
 People ask about  She is actually a VP of Marketing at the Trump Organization. #CelebApprentice
 Who are your favorites on Team Power? Team Plan B? #CelebApprentice
 What team would you choose to win? #CelebApprentice
 Let’s see what happens in the boardroom… #CelebApprentice
 . is always hard to miss-especially when dressed in silver finery. But not sure about the silver lipstick. #CelebApprentice
 . —I know you’re watching- what did you think of your impersonator?
 They should have got Darrell Hammond as the Donald Trump impersonator. #CelebApprentice
 With  on top of the truck the crowd definitely buzzed. #CelebApprentice
 What do you think of  Donald Trump head? The hair’s not quite right, for one thing. #CelebApprentice
 . admitting she’s a threat in the boardroom- that’s not revelation knowledge. #CelebApprentice
 . thinks  is ping-ponging all over the place. Do you agree? #CelebApprentice
 Always good to have  back as advisor as well as  They have their own fan clubs at this point. #CelebApprentice
 . mother thinks I’m very handsome. Now I see where Stephen and Alec get their smarts. #CelebApprentice
 . &  are not likely to become friends –ever! #CelebApprentice
 Last week’s boardroom was truly epic ---and the dust hasn’t settled yet. #CelebApprentice
 I will be tweeting live tonight during Celebrity Apprentice - 9 o'clock on NBC!
 Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9 on NBC - some amazing things happen!
    Thanks Brian!
    Thank you - a great compliment!
    True Michael!
      Thanks Phil!
 Wow - they are really killing Jay Leno - let him go out with dignity!
 Don't blindly pursue a career that others suggest or insist is right for you. It may be worth taking a pay cut for a job you love.
 Via  "Donald Trump to Speak in Novi This May" 
 Looks like the U.S. will be having the coldest March since 1996-global warming anyone?????????
 . is ranked the top course in the West  If you're in the area, book a round today.
 Watching the madness in Cyprus? If our government keeps spending trillion dollar deficits, that could happen here.
 This Sunday's All-Star  features some of the biggest fireworks of the entire season. Get ready.
 . Trump Trashes  On Twitter:You're A 'Dummy' & 'Were Born Stupid'"  
    True.
 . would be nothing without being on the  show.  I don’t see what Sean sees in her—loser!
  Thanks Jim!
   Thank you.
 When I think big, which is often, you can be sure I’m aware of the enormous amount of little things that we will have to account for.
  Thank you.
  Very nice Chris--thanks!
  Do not give up, keep moving forward.
  Yes.
  I don't, but Europeans are being discriminated against--very unfair!
  You were born stupid!
  At least dummy is true!
  Pay attention, study more than what is required, keep your focus on the big picture. And good luck.
 See yourself as an organization. Pay attention to every facet of your life. What’s strong? What’s weak? What’s missing?
 “The difference between stupidity and genius is that genius has its limits.” - Albert Einstein
 There won’t be any new gun legislation. No surprise. Americans support the 2nd amendment.
 Life always presents new opportunities you would never expect. I hosted  & then I starred in one, which sold most PPVs.
 Make no mistake, Obamacare is the first step towards changing our health system into single payer. Just a disaster.
 Problem with  is not their message, it’s that they are incapable of controlling the message.
 According to  2/3 of Mexican LEGAL immigrants do not pursue citizenship because of ‘no interest’ 
 “Here’s something about Donald Trump, he’s got a top rated show on TV and everything he says becomes a headline.”-  All true!
 Yes, All-Star  contestant  is a little out there. But he uses his ‘uniqueness’ to his advantage.
 It won’t stay a buyer’s market forever. If you can, take advantage and buy property asap. You’ll thank me!
 Via  Via "Donald Trump makes plans for Menie Estate marquee" 
 Remember the golden rule of negotiating: He who has the gold makes the rules.
 It’s snowing & freezing in NYC. What the hell ever happened to global warming?
 .  Mark—nice picture, thanks for the invite to the Mavs/Nets game. Next time I’ll go and you’ll win!
    Great going!
 Celebrity Apprentice on in 5 minutes on CNBC - it's great!
 Celebrity Apprentice on CNBC tonight at 9.
 The  will be broadcast tonight on  at 9 PM.
 Haters, stop saying I went bankrupt, it is not so. I never went bankrupt...
 ... but like many other great business people have used the laws to corporate advantage.
 For the haters, out of hundreds of deals or transactions, I have used the bankruptcy laws 4 times in order to cut better deals.
 Almost every major dealmaker has used the bankruptcy laws as a business tool...
 ... Icahn, Kravis, Apollo and most others--but nobody says they went bankrupt!
 People buy deals & immediately put them into bankruptcy in order to make better deals...
 ... It is very effective and a commonly used business tool.
 Why do the losers & haters always say I wear a “wig” when they know I don’t.  Like it or not, it’s all mine—just ask Barbara Walters.
   Win!
  Thanks.
  Happy Birthday Christine.
    Good luck!
   Very nice!
   Great and thanks.
    Thanks Cheryl.
 My shirts, ties & suits (and fragrance, Success) are doing great -- go over & check out Macy’s now—beautiful new selection!
 .  is smart and strategic. People should cut her some slack and respect the way she works on 
    Thanks--and good luck.
  Great!
 Shocker: study reveals that  is completely biased while  is factual   What a surprise!
 .   XXIX less than 3 weeks away.  Looking forward to being inducted into the Hall of Fame!
  Happy Birthday.
 The NFL has just barred ball carriers from using helmet as contact.  What is happening to the sport? The beginning of the end.
 “Playing golf with business associates creates a relaxing atmosphere where everyone has fun...
 ... That’s why so many huge deals are closed on a golf course.” – TRUMP 101
  Quite nice, thanks!
  Trump, by far!
   Chester--unreal.
 Board Room finale of this week’s All-Star  will leave viewers wondering where the rest of the season goes…It's great!
 It’s a shame to hear that the  is failing. No one wants the paper, even if it is being handed out for free.
  Thank you.
  Thanks Jaynie.
   Thanks Jason.
  John was great--everybody misses him. Best wishes.
 . just announced that all 1 hour  episodes are being expanded to 2 hours—it’s amazing what good ratings will do!
 “Donald Trump Takes on Apple   via 
 I remained strong for  during his difficult period. He rewarded me (and himself) by winning at Trump National Doral.
 . “According to the Pros” just named Trump National Golf Club, Philadelphia, the #1 private club. Thanks!
 . very small audience is shrinking rapidly because people finally understand that he is very very dumb!
  Yes and best wishes.
  Thanks and good luck.
    Hi Chris!
  Thank you!
  Thanks Wusong.
  Thanks Michael!
  Thanks David!
  Thanks Seth!
  Thanks Metalchick!
   I have none!
   Emily--true and thanks.
 .  Mark, okay with me but don't start your bullshit again!
 Passion motivates. Passionate people don't give up; their zeal eliminates fear. Passion can also create business opportunities.
 Congratulations to  MK  on being offered Deputy Defense Minister of IDF by  
 If you’re sitting in an office working in a job you hate, then it’s time to THINK BIG and plan your next step…
  Yes and thanks.
  Hi Colby.
 10 yrs ago today, the Iraq war began. 4,485 of our nation’s finest have not returned home alive. Iran will soon control Iraq & its oil.
 Amnesty is suicide for Republicans.Not one of those 12 million who broke our laws will vote Republican.Obama is laughing at 
 . report was written by the ruling class of consultants who blew the election. Short on ideas. Just giving excuses to donors.
 Does anyone remember the fight  had w/ the referee—he was weak & pathetic—a non-athlete trying to live life thru his players.
 Why do shows have  Hispanic Chair for the losing McCain ’08 & Huntsman ’12.  She’s a loser who doesn’t deliver votes.
 Sorry folks, but Donald Trump is far richer and much better looking than dopey 
  Thanks.
  Thanks Anthony.
  True!
   That's why I'll never be Pope!
 All-Star Celebrity  continues to surprise our loyal viewers each and every week. More, and bigger, coming…
 It was just announced that  won’t be going to mornings on CNN.  just made a wise decision.
 . did a great job  Much of what she said was plain old "common sense."
 . became a super liberal Obama fan only because he must need the money--and on  that’s the way it is.
 . should have stayed at CNBC—she was never smart, but people liked her.  Jeff Zucker’s got problems!
 For beauty and flight, I’ll take the  757 over the  787 any day!
 l still think  should just bite the bullet & get rid of the new batteries in the 787. Those batteries will always be a problem!
 It was great having  back on this week's  
 .  ratings are so pathetic, she even loses to  at 7PM which is replay of 5PM 
 Via The Hindu  "Realty brand Donald Trump’s India venture to sport desi tag" 
 I don’t like seeing the Pope standing at the checkout counter (front desk) of a hotel in order to pay his bill. It’s not Pope-like!
 .  is a really dumb guy(and I know him well)—that’s why he works swimmingly with our leaders in Washington.
 Re: CPAC “The crowd in the main room filled to capacity by the end of Trump’s address, something his operative said he planned to do...
 .... to help McConnell, who spoke right after him.”
 I was sorry to decline headlining the Reagan Dinner last Saturday due to a prior business commitment. Pres. Reagan was one of the greats.
 . played 3 separate audio bites (the most of anyone) of my CPAC speech. Hour 3 in Friday's show.
 Be weak on immigration and ensure Democratic victory.
 . is right—the Republicans lost because they weren’t conservative enough—or tough enough.
 But  is physically weak, he has no clubhead speed or game!
    Thanks!
   Thanks!
   Thanks!
    True!
 . is so short off the tee he can't have much of a punch. He's just a weak man with a big mouth!
 WHO IS GOING TO GET IRAQ'S OIL???????
 Bombings all over Iraq today.That country is falling apart-such a horrible waste of lives and 1.5 trillion dollars (and I told you so!).
    You are correct, but he is so easy!
  is very short off the tee - and his basketball sucks also!
 Golf match? I've won 18 Club Championships including this weekend.  swings like a little girl with no power or talent. Mark's a loser
    Great!
    We just blew it up dummy!
     You were fantastic last night on Celebrity Apprentice - everybody loved you!
     Thanks.
   Not even close!
   But I like picking on losers!
   Great!
     Great!
    Stupid, they tried that with The Benefactor and Mark went splat!
    Not even close, dopey!
   Thank you!
    You are right, he is a total joke - his players laugh at him!
   Dan, because I love beating lowlifes!
   Thanks Tanja!
    Thanks!
 Apprentice ratings doing great - easily won the 10 o'clock hour over other networks!
 “Leverage: don’t make deals without it.” – The Art of the Deal
 Is Anthony Weiner also delusional? Add him to NY Sex Offender list instead!
 Sexual pervert & deviant Anthony Weiner is polling to see if he can run for NYC Mayor...
 Great article by   explaining why  was biggest loser   James is sharp.
 . is 1-12 against the Western Conference’s top four seeds after Sunday’s loss &  swept the season series.
 Why does  continue to embarrass the 31-35 & 11TH place  with childish behavior? Really unprofessional!
 Via  "La Toya Jackson fired from 'All-Star Celebrity Apprentice' by Donald Trump" 
 New  report calls for embracing “comprehensive immigration reform.”  Does the  have a death wish?
 The Blue Monster is being torn up at Trump  On April 1, I go out & play it one more time until the new course opens.
 . "Donald Trump Tells A Fascinating Inside Story About His Dealings w/ The Obama WH"  
 . played great audio from my  press conference on her radio show.  Glad she made it!
 Via  "Donald Trump to CPAC: Romney 'Didn't Talk Enough About Success'"  by 
 Scotland will be so lucky if this monstrosity is not built—I will tie them up in courts for years, if necessary.
 Vattenfall CEO stated that the company needed to prepare itself for falling electricity demands in coming years-- a  changing market.
 Vattenfall, the company behind a proposed asinine windfarm off the coast of Aberdeen, Scotland, is having serious financial difficulty.
 Via  “TRENDING: Trump a right-leaning tower at CPAC”  by 
 “TRUMP HITS BACK AT CHRIS MATTHEWS’ BIRTHER RANT: ‘HE USED TO BE A MUCH MORE INTELLIGENT MAN’"   
 Via  "Donald Trump: Obama should golf w/ Republicans, not his ‘local friends’"  by 
 If  is not in the Board Room, I can’t fire her.   made a strategic mistake.
 .  interview discussing a budget deal, my #CPAC2013 speech,  & firing  
 “All-Star Celebrity Apprentice” ranked #1 for the 10 o’clock hour among ABC, CBS and NBC with a season-high 19% margin.
    Trump Tower is open to the public.
 Via   ‘Most Overrated Man in Politics,’Responsible for Ashley Judd’s Rise”  
 Via  Backstage Interview w/ Donald Trump at CPAC"  by  Great seeing you David!
 I will not be commenting on boardroom specifics- would be unfair to the different time zones. #CelebApprentice
 True,  is a scene stealer without trying. He’s got a gift. #CelebApprentice
 . re  is right, she’s becoming predictable.
 . is not winning points, being called “the wicked witch of the Mid-West” and most certainly other things. #CelebApprentice
 . new name via  “Ms. Saboteur” sounds rather elegant. #CelebApprentice
 . emergency has put a new spin on Team Power’s presentation—but it’s not “show time” yet. #CelebApprentice
 . informs   that  is a “conniving witch”—is he surprised? Are we surprised? #CelebApprentice
 “ is a bit toxic” per  Being a bit PC? #CelebApprentice
 There’s no love lost between   &  Disrespectful? Who is being disrespectful? #CelebApprentice
 Music cues, audience participation, sounds like a very active Team Power. #CelebApprentice
 . on the cover of Soap Opera Digest? That’s a credential… #CelebApprentice
 And happy to welcome  back as an advisor— he will have his own show and is doing great. #CelebApprentice
 . is back—good news for Plan B. #CelebApprentice
 The Paley Center for Media is a great place to visit when you’re in NYC. #CelebApprentice
 . has another meltdown … while giving a check for $40,000 to Michael’s charity, the Sue Duncan Center. #CelebApprentice
 Great line from   “I am an angel in an earth suit.” Do you agree? #CelebApprentice
 . meltdown—was it for real?  thinks she could be an Oscar winner for that performance… #CelebApprentice
 The tournament at Trump National Doral was much more exciting than what is going on now!
 I'll be tweeting live tonight starting at 9PM ET re: Don't worry other time zones, I will give nothing away!
     Annika - Thanks, you are the GREATEST - We all adore you!
     Zero.
 Best ratings for the Dateline show were for six months, not two months!
  It's Endometriosis Awareness Month-176 million women suffer from this disease.
 Just won The Club Championship at Trump International Golf Club in Palm Beach-lots of very good golfers-never easy to win a C.C.
 Last weeks Dateline, which I hosted, was the highest rated Dateline since January!
 Don't forget to watch Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9 on NBC - GREAT EPISODE!
 Wow-Record ratings for WGC Cadillac Championship at Trump National Doral's Blue Monster-Most watched in seven years. CONGRATS to Woods
 Huff Post "His early morning speech drew a large crowd, far larger than remarks at the same time on Thursday" and packed by end! The facts.
 Thanks for all of the accolades on my speech today - it's all about the truth!
 Honest reporters stated that the Prayer Breakfast was going on during my CPAC speech and security was very slow to let people in-long lines!
 I agreed to take the worst spot at CPAC because nobody else wanted it and it was the only time I could be there - it was great fun!
 WHY CAN'T THE MEDIA TELL THE TRUTH - WE WOULD ALL BE SO MUCH BETTER OFF!
 “TRUMP TO CPAC: BUILD A GREAT ECONOMY”  via 
 Via  “EXCLUSIVE: TRUMP SMACKS BACK AGAINST MEDIA ATTACKS ON CPAC SPEECH”  by 
 “Donald Trump: The View Will be Better without Joy Behar (Video)”  via 
 Via  "TRUMP TO REPUBLICANS: 'PLAY THE DEBT CEILING CARD'"  by 
 For accurate reporting of my  speech, read    
 ......   & 
  at  is such a pathetic reporter who doesn’t want to know the truth. A total Obama flunky & hack.
 Boring & failing  3rd rate political reporter  had flunky  write a totally false report about me today......
 ..... He knows I don’t respect him.
 Via  "Trump bashes  $400M 'failure'"  by 
 Via gatewaypundit: “Donald Trump: “Anthony Weiner is a Whack-Job Pervert” (Video)” 
 Via  "Trump on Obama and Congress: ‘Lock them up’ in a room like Vatican conclave"  by 
 Via  “Trump:  ‘The Most Over-rated Man in Politics’” 
 I watched the last two minutes of the  game last night--- I just loved watching them lose.
 Press conference after CPAC speech this morning was excellent- lots of very professional reporters.
 The CPAC speech went really well this morning--- first speaker--- standing ovation. I really enjoyed it.
 When you think big, you will automatically trigger more details because details are the major component of making anything big.
 . has less TV persona than  any other person I can think of. He’s an arrogant, crude, dope who met some very stupid people...
 ...Those stupid people bought  company (of which he owned a piece).
 There’s a reason  partners can’t stand him and on top of that, the team sucks!
 Obama hasn't released a budget in over 2 years & for the 1st time House & Senate delivered budgets before him 
 CPAC attendees & fellow patriots - lines for my  start at 7:00AM outside the Potomac Ballroom. Make sure to get there early!
 Really big crowd expected tomorrow morning at # CPAC2013. I look forward to it!
 Via   “most likely scenario remains finishing a frustrating ninth in the West” 
 When  had his own show, The Benefactor, it totally “bombed!”
 I love watching dummy  promote on ok show named Shark Tank—but he is just a small part of that show.
 Interview w/  discussing my WH tour offer,  terrible ads & Ashley Judd's candidacy 
 Good move by  in downgrading  to a dead weekend spot. This is truly a guy who shouldn't be on tv.
   Thanks.
   Thanks Rick.
 .  made a great decision in firing  from  The show will be better without her!
 Congratulations to my Catholic friends on the selection of Pope Francis I to lead the Catholic Church. People that know him love him!
 To show you how shallow politicians can be, many are jealous of my  speaking slot & also their fellow Republicans! Not good!
 The DC press corps is obsessed with my  speech which is scheduled  tomorrow 8:45AM in the Potomac Ballroom. Can't blame them.
 Wow--just 1 day after my offer to fund all WH tours "Obama backtracks on decision to cancel all White House tours” ...
 .... Do I get the credit for this? Thank you! 
 Dummy  made up a story about a visit to Mar-a-Lago last night on Leno. It never happened—I don’t talk that way.
  Thank you Dennis.
 Congrats to  and  on a great five years!
 I watched Mark Cuban on Jay Leno last night - what a jerk!
 Celebrity Apprentice will be rebroadcast tonight at 9 on CNBC.
  Great and good luck!
 “You have to have a good reason for doing what you’re doing, because people connect with the why.” – Midas Touch
 Do your homework. Wasting other people’s time due to poor planning and thoughtlessness will only leave a bad impression.
 According to new WPOST-ABC poll, Obama has just lost 14 points on public trust with economy
 In making any decision, you need all the facts. But after exhausting all due diligence, in the end you have to go with your gut!
 Best of luck to my good friend Derek Jeter on his first game today back at shortstop.  Captain is a warrior & winner.
   The Art of the Deal and Think Like a Champion would be helpful.
 . You are so good and so talented that I have no doubt you will conquer the 18th hole at the "New" Blue Monster 
 . had its largest ever ticket sales the day of my announcement. Really an honor. Can’t wait to see everyone.
 The sequester is less than 2% of total 2013 budget. Why can’t the WH re-allocate funds and keep the tours open for children? #OpenOurWH
 Lines for my  address start at 7:00AM outside the Potomac Ballroom. ACU has asked that you get there early. #CPAC2013
 Via  "Donald Trump to get more CPAC time than Marco Rubio"   knows how to prioritize!
  Good idea--I wish him luck.
  Agreed, they're doing a great job.
 It’s sad that the WH is punishing children from across the country by closing all tours. Doesn’t have to be.  WH should take my offer.
  Thanks Mary.
  Thanks and good luck.
  Yes and thanks.
  My best wishes.
 Help save the lives of our troops.Our #vets suffering from TBI/PTS need treatment  Donate to 
 Help fight autism--go to   website for  donations & government activation.
 Autism Speaks, head up by Bob & Suzanne Wright, does a fantastic job—if only we had more people like them! To help: 
  Thanks Paul - we miss you!
   Thanks!
    Great!
    Thanks--and good luck.
  Thanks Jeff.
 Ashley Judd's candidacy was created by Karl Rove's terrible ads, even before she thought seriously about running...
 ...The ads made her look great and now she probably will run.
 “Whether you realize it or not, your brand can be many times more valuable than your business.” – Midas Touch
 Hamas has warned Pres. Obama not to visit the Temple Mount during his trip to Israel 
  Thanks Spence.
  Thanks Wilson.
 A note from the fabulous Mark Burnett:  “Donald, congratulations again, we are #1 in the 10:00pm hour. I am tweeting about it.”
 My  speech is scheduled Friday at 8:45AM in the Potomac Ballroom. Will also be telecast live on CSPAN & cable news networks.
 Congratulations to  on celebrating its 25 year anniversary. Great paper under amazing management!
 Glad to hear  will be staying on  Elizabeth has great presence & doesn’t back down from sharing her views.
 All-Star Celebrity  continues to dominate the Sunday 10PM slot in every key demographic. Still hot after 13 seasons!
 Via  "Palin, Trump Get Longer Speaking Slots at CPAC" by  
 Via "Trump Offers to Fund White House Tours " 
 Via  "Trump Says He’ll Foot Bill for White House Tours" 
 Re: Ashley Judd: Keep  away. He already made her a viable candidate.
 Our economy has had worst recovery under Obama since the Depression. Results of his policies speak for themselves. No new taxes!
 .  Great playing this weekend. You are a true winner. We look forward to having you back to Trump National Doral.
 Really looking forward to my address  this Friday morning at 8:30. Will stress jobs, etc. Can't wait to see my many friends.
 According to new employment numbers, 296,000 Americans have dropped out of the work force & gave up looking for work.
 Between a terrible press conference, mishandled prisoner swap & Taliban attacks, Hagel's 1st trip as SOD was a disaster. No surprise.
 Yesterday’s  results show Trump  course was already difficult. Will be the best after $250M renovations.
 .  is a great guy & a total winner! He understood - he did not leave me any other choice. Look forward to keeping in touch.
  Brande-- Thank you! You have been a pleasure to work with.
 To   He is truly a great champion and we were honored to have him at Trump National Doral.  #Trump
 If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them. Thoreau
 Via  “Donald Trump on His Dream Job and 'All-Star Celebrity Apprentice'”  
 My  int. re: Tiger’s victory at Trump  's  my WH tour offer and CPAC 
 . was #1 on network TV last night in its time slot and easily won the 10 o’clock hour in all major demographics.
 Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear to negotiate.
 The losing team is now back in boardroom. I can't discuss the team members or what's going on or what happens from here on out.
 Re my hair-Should I change it? What do you think?
 It's true... Dennis is really into this-very animated. I have never seen him this way before.
 Which team is your favorite?
 Re Omarosa: Nasty, tough or smart...or all?
 Does anyone agree with Marilu that Gary, while 'adorable', is a distraction?
 Omarosa is very confident that the execs loved her concept & presentation.
 That's an interesting talent that Marilu possesses!
 Next she says she's being set up by Omarosa to fail....is somebody confused?
 What?!  LaToya is saying Omarosa is one of the nicest people she's met?
 On the whole, the teams seem to be working well together. No wars...yet.
 Gary as the Cat in the Hat? He can work it out.
 What do you think of Gary's definition of    f-u-n?
 Trace delivers check to hospital in NYC:  American Red Cross must be grateful to Trace and his team for their tremendous work.
 Honest Omarosa: she won't backstab-she'll come at you from the front.
 Which team do you think has the edge in this interactive photo experience task assignment?
 My 757 is incredible-I think the teams agree on that.
 Will Team Power be able to withstand Omarosa as PM? Smooth sailing is not expected.
 Will Plan B miss Trace?
 Firing Bret was a tough one for me-but Omarosa doesn't seem to mind.
 Omarosa always promises and delivers high drama...
 Trace and his team raised an amazing amount of $.  Looks like a good season for charities.
 There's definitely no love lost between Piers and Omarosa.
 Bret had a target on his back from the get go...
 That was some episode last week-we've got a great cast!
 I will be live tweeting during the  tonight at 9PM ET.
 I'm at Trump Doral right now, Tiger will tee off shortly.
 How much is South Korea paying the U.S. for protection against North Korea???? NOTHING!
 Get the big picture but be prepared for the picture to change. Be persistent and alert every single day.
 Resolve to be bigger than your problems. Who’s the boss? Realize that fear is the exact opposite of faith.
 “ACU ANNOUNCES DONALD TRUMP TO ADDRESS CPAC 2013”  via 
 Surprise – China has spies throughout NASA stealing our R&D  When will we ever make them pay for espionage?
   Good luck.
 Follow Trump  WGC  leadership board here at   
  Be prepared to go it alone--being an entrepreneur is not, initially, a group effort. Keep your focus. Read Midas Touch.
 Via  "Donald Trump aims to bring luxury to Doral Golf Resort & Spa"  
 Make sure to tune in to All-Star Celebrity  this Sunday at 9PM EST for another round of fireworks and surprises!
 “You have to be patient as well as enthusiastic when it comes to your goals. Think big, but be realistic.” – Think Big
 Golf is a brain game & is a great way to improve your business skills. Concentration,assessment, technique & passion...it's all there.
   Good luck!
  Hi Hallmar.
   Agree--thanks!
   Thanks Becky.
  Great
 Via  “Trump to Speak at CPAC”   #CPAC13
 Via  “Last year, it was Tiger Woods with the walk-off”    #TrumpDoral
 The WGC  leadership board is available here:  
 Via  “Donald Trump, Rory McIlroy and Matt Kuchar are guys to watch at   
 “Image is important and speaks more than the words or fine print that goes along with the product.” – Midas Touch
 Notice the first word in my Think Big credo: Think = the 1st step. Use everything in your power to utilize & develop that capacity.
 Re: Decisions:  Cover your bases, then ask yourself this question: "What am I pretending not to see?" This can save a lot of time & trouble.
   Thanks, good choice & good luck.
   Good goal.
   Good thing to remember.
       Thanks Brad.
 . - Wow - "Ticket sales go through the roof after Trump asked to speak at CPAC"
  Good luck!
  Great!
  Thanks.
 Go to Trump National Doral, Miami, and watch Tiger, Phil, Ernie, Rory and all of the other great players compete in The WGC Cadillac Champ!
 I don't know why but I feel so sorry for dummy reporter John Heilemann when I watch him on television.
 John Heilemann, the lightweight reporter begging to be on joe, looks like a timebomb waiting to explode-he's a nervous and sad mess!
  Good to hear, enjoy!
   Thanks Raul.
  Thank you.
   Thanks Jessica.
  Good subject, good luck!
 My interview w/  re:  & my $200M of future renovations invested in Trump  
 It’s been great making so many new friends at Trump  for the  Good luck to everyone!
 . hope you enjoyed the premiere of All-Star Celebrity  Make sure  watches!
 Via   "DONALD TRUMP TO SPEAK AT CPAC"  by 
 Via  "Major makeover: Trump has big vision for Doral"  by 
 Via  "Trump 'blowing up'  after WGC-  by 
 Dateline NBC, featuring yours truly, just set a season high in households in the ratings—no wonder NBC likes me so much! 
 Without momentum there’s a lack of energy that can lead the best of ideas to nowhere. Get your momentum going-- and keep it going.
 It was just announced that  song “DonaldTrump” went platinum—tell  Mac Miller to kiss my ass!
 Building a brand is like building a skyscraper-the foundation comes first. The bigger the building, the deeper the foundation needs to be
  It will be fantastic--be sure to visit.
  I wish him the best of luck.
 Via  Trump will speak at CPAC"by     
 It is my great honor to be speaking at CPAC 2013. They are all about what's good for America.
   Thanks Michael.
  Thanks Evan and good luck.
 It’s important to promote an image of yourself each and every day. It’s part of having a sense of self and a sense of purpose.
 “When you’re at a meeting, monitor your behavior and work at being an observer – of yourself and others.” – Think Like a Billionaire
 Ernie Els and myself at Trump National Doral. 
       Happy Birthday Tiffany.
 Just arrived at Trump National Doral, saying hello to all the great players. This place is amazing.Come Thursday & see for yourselves!
 The Formula of Knowledge: The best way to learn is through studying the history of success and failures in your industry.
   If you love what you're doing, motivation is never a problem.
  It will be fantastic! Be sure to visit.
 Remember--the worst thing you can do in a negotiation is seem desperate to make the deal.
   I agree, it's a beautiful course to play. Thanks.
  Thanks Sven and good luck.
 Rory, Tiger, Phil and Ernie will be fun to watch this weekend at Trump National Doral.
 Heading to Trump National Doral to check the progress prior to the start of the Cadillac Championship on Thursday. I’ll be there all week
 Despite previous tweet, Dennis Rodman would do a better job than the current (cont) 
 To show you how dishonest some of the press is, they took my funny & (cont) 
 For those of you defending Bret and saying Omarosa should go remember Bret chose O which could also be considered a big mistake!
  Matt--Hope you will have a Happy Birthday.
  Thanks Mary.
 3.  You should tweet your pick for MVP using the celebrity’s name followed by the hashtag #CelebApprenticeMVP.
 2.  The celebrity with the highest totals by Tuesday noon ET gets an extra donation to his or her charity…
 1.   Each week, you the audience can choose an MVP among the celebrities  using Twitter…...
 “If you want to be successful at anything in life, you have to be able to handle pressure.” – Think Big
   Thank you.
 China has announced it is “fully prepared” for a currency war  Outrageous - they have no fear of our leaders.
 Via  "Donald Trump reveals first image of his new Aberdeenshire hotel" 
 Additionally,  ranked as the #1 program in the 9-11 pm time period with adults in the 25-54  age group.
 . wins 10-11 o’clock hour in all key ratings demographics, including, most importantly, the 18-49 age group.
 Glad everyone could see Mar-a-Lago last night on  It is the crown jewel of Palm Beach.
 My  interview re: firing  on the premiere of All-Star  & politics 
  Thanks!
 ...Brande was also smart in not bringing Omarosa to the boardroom.
 Brande would have been fired immediately if she didn't raise $132,000, a really large sum. Bret, on the other hand, raised very little...
 I will be doing Fox and Friends at 7 A.M. this morning.
 So, what did you think of my decision? What would you have done? #CelebApprentice
 I'll always like  because she constantly defends me. #CelebApprentice
 . is right- he won the show because “I know how to play the game.” #CelebApprentice
 . looks like a movie star from the days of glamour and beauty. #CelebApprentice
 Don't worry West Coast etc. we are not going to tweet who was fired or give any indication there of until after it airs. #CelebApprentice
 Paul Teutul is always good on the show. #CelebApprentice
 Even  is impressed by  #CelebApprentice
 . as a cashier- a big mistake by  #CelebApprentice
 . are both wonderful people. Their show is terrific. #CelebApprentice
 . must be thinking of North Korea. #CelebApprentice
 . is definitely different. #CelebApprentice
 . and  really hate each other. #CelebApprentice
 . and  will be wonderful advisors. #CelebApprentice
 I can’t believe he would choose  as his first choice! She is hard to handle. #CelebApprentice
 I always believed  was making a mistake in coming back as a competitor. I disagree with him but... 
 . looks better with her reduced lips. Good move, Lisa. #CelebApprentice
 Looks like  is up to the challenge. #CelebApprentice
 How does this cast look to you? Pretty amazing. #CelebApprentice
 Losers and haters,even you, as low and dumb as you are, can learn from watching Apprentice and checking out my tweets-you can still succeed!
 Losers and haters are invited to watch Celebrity Apprentice along with the many great and productive people in the hope that you will learn.
 I will be live tweeting during the Celebrity Apprentice at 9 P.M.  Also will be hosting Dateline just prior to Apprentice at 8 P.M.
  Allen and Gail - you will like it - see you both soon!
 Everybody wants to see and talk to Dennis Rodman - he will be on Celebrity Apprentice tonight at 9.
  Thanks!
   Great advice!
  True and thanks John!
 Really bad article about me in the dying (or dead) Esquire Magazine. Totally false - lots of hatred. When will this boring magazine close?
   Thanks.
  Thanks Rich.
  Thanks Matt.
  Thanks Janise!
  Thanks.
 Is Chris Jackson as dumb as I hear - but I still like that he follows me like a good little soldier!
  Thanks Vincent!
   Thanks for the nice words Irv!
  I never went bankrupt.
   I never went bankrupt.
   I never went bankrupt.
   Dopey, I never filed for bankruptcy.
   Thanks Derek- and true!
  Thanks Hailey- you sound great!
 Thousands of fans have been sending letters to Trump Tower in anticipation of  Really good show.
 “All the things I love is what my business is all about.” - 
 Watching Pyongyang terrorize Asia today is just amazing!
 A friend is one who has the same enemies as you have. -- Abraham Lincoln
 We can’t even stop the Norks from blasting a missile. China is laughing at us. It is really sad.
 “There is no worse feeling than being trapped in a job you do not enjoy. You have to love what you do.” - Think Big
 Egypt is a total mess. We should have backed Mubarak instead of dropping him like a dog.
 The gorgeous contestants of Trump Miss Universe are so excited to be simulcast on both  and  Will be a beautiful show!
 I have helped many friends and colleagues in their business ventures. They always thank me after they succeed. #MIDASTOUCH
 You get what you vote for. 21% of small business owners planning to cut their workforce in 2013 
    March 3rd. Tune in!
  Happy Birthday
 The amazing Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles. 
 No money wasted like bad ads—the Republicans spent more & got nothing for it.
 Can you believe the Republicans are studying the Democrats on how to win an election?
 I let  come back on the record 13th season of ‘All Star’  after he relentlessly begged me to--good t.v.
 For those of you in trouble—(in these troubled times)—never, ever give up!
   Happy Anniversary Teresa
 Re Real Estate: You don’t necessarily need the best location. What you need is the best deal…
 …you can enhance location through promotion and work.
 Re Life: Life is very fragile and success doesn’t change that. If anything, success makes it more fragile.
 “The biggest doers often suffer the biggest setbacks in life. So if you want to aim high, you have be able to handle the bumps.”–Think Big
 Great – we are sending even more F-16’s to the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt  This is a total disaster.
 The Republicans must use the debt ceiling as leverage to make a great deal!
 It’s Tuesday. How many more customers has Glenfiddich lost today?
 Trump Miss Universe, simulcast on  and  on December 19th, will once again deliver an entertaining and ‘beautiful’ show!
 Re: Media: If you are a little different or a little outrageous…the press is going to write about you—beats paying for ads.
  March 3rd--tune in!
 “Fans like winners. They come to watch stars – great, exciting players who do great exciting things.” - The Art of The Deal
 He’s back and causing more trouble than ever before!  returns in the record 13th season of ‘All Star’ 
 Negotiation tip #2: I always go into the deal anticipating the worst...
 ...If you plan for the worst—if you can live with the worst—the good will always take care of itself.
 Negotiation tip #1: The worst thing you can possibly do in a deal is seem desperate to make it.
 China is buying so many of our companies-- it’s really getting bad.
 . re: my Scottish course “Quite simply, this is not the best new links course in the UK, it is the best links course, full stop"
  Thank you
  Thanks Cody
  Happy Birthday Levi--Work hard!
 The UK is seriously thinking about halting wind turbine subsidies. Good news, killing country.
 Some dope tweeted my message to my friend Bill Belichick incorrectly--they called him Bob. Sorry Bill! 
 Test: Tweet me the reason  got fired from  (other than his bad ratings).
  The Art of the Deal is a good start.
 Good luck to Bob Kraft, Tom Brady, and Coach Bill Belichick tonight.
 If the Republicans ever want to win a presidential election in the next 30 years they must get rid of  He is useless.
 I still don't get how  spent $400 million & lost all.
 . Keep up the good work!
 The Ground Zero Mosque should not go up where planned. It is wrong. My offer still stands to buy the property. Good deal for everyone.
  Sunday, March 3rd! Be sure to tune in!
 The lunatics in Congress banned the word ‘lunatic’ from Congress last week  Busy doing the peoples’ work!
 “You can’t con people, at least not for long. If you don’t deliver the goods, people will eventually catch on.” - The Art of The Deal
 Great win by the  yesterday. If they run the table, they will make the playoffs.
 Great knockout on Saturday by Juan Manuel Marquez on Manny Pacquiao. A great fight!
 The government is borrowing 46 cents on every dollar it spends  Dangerous for us but great news for China.
 The Chinese are smart. They bought up over $7B in US housing last year  U.S. is busy making China even richer.
 China is about to acquire a unit of AIG, which we bailed out, for $5.5B  China is making great deals on our backs.
 December 19th’s simulcast of Trump Miss Universe on  and  will be a massive success. The girls are amazing this year!
 The smart and beautiful  shines in the upcoming record 13th season of ‘All Star’  We are lucky to have her!
 Watch  shave his mustache on  last Friday with my interview congratulating David at the end 
 My  interview discussing the Ground Zero Mosque, fiscal cliff, China buying AIG & Anna Wintour 
 Dopey Sugar  I can't believe you were knighted. If they knew more about you, I'm sure they'd take away your title.
 Dopey Sugar  The people in the UK love seeing you get beat up--you're easy!
  Dopey Sugar--because it was open all season long--you can't play golf in the snow, you stupid ass.
 I just bought stock in Tiffany & Company and McDonald's. Two ends of the spectrum but I like both companies.
 Dopey Sugar  are the worst kind of loser—a total fool.
 . are expensive, need subsidy,kill birds & destroy country & waterway beauty. Also, very unreliable & expensive energy.
 Dopey Sugar  you were smart, which you are not, you would oppose the monstrous windfarms that will destroy your country.
 . If you didn’t say the iPod would be gone in a year, you might have been really rich instead of the peanut money you have.
 Dopey Sugar  You should thank me for having created the platform on which you became known--The Apprentice. Say Thank you Donald
 Dopey Sugar  hear you hate being beaten so badly on twitter—get used to it!
 Dopey Sugar— Isn’t it sad that my golf course in Scotland just got “best new course in the world”—it’s worth more than you are!
 DopeySugar  —Why did you close down your site over the weekend? Did someone tell you to do it?
 Dopey Sugar  You can't carry  jock!
 Dopey Sugar  a total loser who  doesn't think is very smart or very rich. I agree with Piers!
 Dopey Sugar  Bad ratings--come on, keep making me money--remember, I own your show.
 Dopey Sugar  I hear your ratings last week were at an all time low--you better get them up or you'll be fired.
 Dopey Sugar  I never go silent. I was buying a major property in Florida--a property worth more than you are!
 Sorry for such silence—spent weekend at closing of Ritz Carlton in Jupiter, Florida—just bought it, will be great!
 People ask me what I do in my free time. The answer--I don't have any.
 This is such a special time to be in New York City. No better city in the world to celebrate Christmas!
 Many people still out of power in Staten Island. Absolutely ridiculous. Why can't they get service?
 This year's Trump Miss Universe Pageant is comprised of truly beautiful women.Will be simulcast live December 19th on  and 
 Today's job report is not a good sign & we could be facing another recession. No real job growth. We need over 300K new jobs a month.
 Back by popular demand, TV personality  returns in the record 13th season of 'All Star'  Marilu does great!
 Via  "Donald Trump to Lord Sugar: 'Drop to your knees and thank me'" 
 I just retained Sir Nick Faldo to be the architect of the Red Course at Doral--he will do a tremendous job! 
 To Tom Brady  and Gisele--Best wishes on the birth of your daughter. Tom is a great player and great friend.
 Dopey  I'm worth $8 billion and you're worth peanuts...without my show nobody would even know who you are.
 Dopey  People are calling in saying you are being beaten badly w/ the tweets...
 ... You need the income from the show to keep going--hope it doesn't hurt.
 “There are 2 things I’ve found I’m very good at: overcoming obstacles and motivating good people to do their best work.”–The Art of The Deal
 Dopey Sugar  The wind turbines are ruining the beauty & majesty of Scotland...
 . you wouldn’t notice because you have no vision and you are a total loser.
 . - nice call on predicting that the iPOD would be "dead, finished, gone, kaput"  Great business foresight.
 Dopey Sugar. ...Your net worth doesn't even qualify you to host the Apprentice. Keep making me money.
 Dopey Sugar  worth more than $8 billion, acknowledged, almost no debt ...
 Sugar  Why don't you tell the public what you're really worth--they would be very disappointed.
 Sugar  Unlike yours, my financials are phenomenal. People don't know your real numbers & would not be impressed.
   You lie. Everyone knows your ass is being kicked on twitter. You're easy.
  Thanks
  Thanks!
  Thank you.
  True!
   No, his ignorance!
 Sugar  should say thank you, Donald, like a good little boy... ...
 ...instead of biting the hand that feeds you! Don’t bother, just keep making me money!
   Sugar, if you taught Piers Morgan he never would have won!
 We are way over the fiscal cliff. And with Obama Care being fully implemented in less than 14 months, it may be too late.
 Alex Rodriguez has played under 140 games in each of the last five seasons. He will miss half of next season. Really bad deal for 
 Dopey  in the mirror and thank the real Lord that Donald Trump exists. You are nothing!
   I easily could but as long as Sugar is making me money (it's my show) I won't--unlike Sugar, I'm not stupid!
 When I made the Apprentice the #1 show in the US, that was a good day for you...
 ... and many others. Drop to your knees, Sugar, and say thank you, Mr. Trump.
 Sugar:  working hard so I make plenty of $ with your show...
 ...You have little persona, but The Apprentice concept is great and lucky for you!
 Sugar:  you, I own The Apprentice. You were never successful enough...
 .... to do The Apprentice but I approved you anyway. Without my show you’d be nothing!
 . If you think ugly windmills are good for Scotland you are an even worse businessman than I thought...
 ... and, in my opinion, should not be doing The Apprentice.
  25 days to go until fiscal cliff (bad name)—it is only a fiscal curb! Debt ceiling is real fiscal cliff.. will be interesting!
  Dopey, same people voting over & over again? Andy Murray #1 by far.
 You’re all wrong—check the facts! UK is massively subsidizing Scotland’s wind turbines & the people don’t want them.
 How can George Osborne reduce UK debt while spending billions to subsidize Scotland’s garbage wind turbines that are destroying the country?
 When I renovated Wollman Rink in Central Park, it came in $750,000 under budget..
 ... and opened a full month ahead of schedule. Case is taught in Wharton.
   Always go with the truth!
    True!
  Work hard and love what you do!
  Thanks and yes!
    Thank you.
    Thanks Darlene.
  Thanks Rob!
 All the contestants have arrived to compete in Trump Miss Universe Pageant in Las Vegas. Today’s welcoming ceremony will be terrific!
 My support of Anna Wintour for Ambassador got a lot of coverage. She is smart and will be a strong advocate for the US.
 Via  “Trump endorses Wintour for ambassadorship” 
 Karzai of Afghanistan is not sticking with our signed agreement. They are dropping us like dopes. Get out now and re-build U.S.!
  Wow--very nice!
     Don't be so sure!
    Work hard!
  Kris, great place, enjoy!
  He is a loser--Andy Murray is a winner!
  I built perhaps the greatest golf course in the world--lots of tourism--you shouldn't!
 Is PM Cameron a dummy? With monumental cuts in UK spending, how come he continues to spend billions of pounds ...
 ....on ruining Scotland’s beauty with ugly & costly wind turbines?
 Scots should boycott Glenfiddich garbage for not choosing great Olympic & U.S. Open champ Andy Murray over total loser Michael Forbes.
  I will!
   And you looked great last night Lara.
 Twisted Sister frontman  shines in the record 13th season of ‘All Star’  The Iron Man of Rock and Roll is great!
 Republicans have the cards because of the debt ceiling—but it doesn’t seem that way!
 25 days to go until fiscal cliff (bad name)—it is only a fiscal curb! Debt ceiling is real fiscal cliff...and that will be interesting!
    Your performance was great last night--BQ will win.
     The greatest compliment of all--thanks!
    Thanks Rod--you're a great player and guy.
  True--but keep up the good work!
 . you can’t make a great deal go over the cliff & negotiate new deal along with debt ceiling in February!—Trump 101.
 Speaker  seems to have gained strength in house—a good thing!
 Dave Brubeck was great and will be missed!
 “I like thinking big. To me it’s very simple: if you’re going to be thinking anyway, you might as well think big.” – The Art of The Deal
  Thanks!
  So do most smart people!
  Thank you.
  Thanks--glad she enjoyed herself.
  Soon--thanks.
   True--thanks.
  Thank you.
 “Christmas waves a magic wand over this world, and behold, everything is softer and more beautiful.” -- Norman Vincent Peale
  is such an embarrassment that  is keeping him off air  Rove should be out of politics. A total loser!
 “I don’t see the point of being politically correct if that means actually being incorrect.” – Donald J. Trump 'Midas Touch'
   Thanks
  Thank you.
  Thank you
 . Dan, of course stories on me do well. Glad you have found a medium you can actual do well on. TV was not your forte.
 The record 13th season of ‘All Star’  features the return of the beautiful  The fans love her!
 I am happy to hear that Pres.Obama is considering giving Anna Wintour  an ambassadorship. She is a winner & really smart!
 Via  “Awards for Trump’s golf course” 
   You would not even believe how dirty & disgusting his property is--clean it with joke Glenfiddich.
   I know you are jealous of Forbes & a total loser.
  Thanks
  Thanks
    Thank you
  You must be drinking too much of that garbage.
  Very hot in Florida in July & August.
 . is doing really well & soon coming to Broadway.
  Can't pick a favorite--thanks.
 We are getting rid of all Glenfiddich garbage alcohol from Trump properties.
 Tell ‘Top Scot’ Michael Forbes to clean up his property—it is an embarrassment to Scotland.
 Glenfiddich is a joke—should have chosen Andy Murray—U.S. Open & Olympic gold winner—as Top Scot instead of a total loser!
   David--I hear you are jealous & angry that Forbes got the award over you--two losers!
  Yes--it is great!
  Thanks Jeff.
   Happy Birthday Andrew
  Thanks--and good luck.
  Thanks.
 If you are planning to visit the world famous Trump Tower Atrium, be sure to come early. During the holiday season it is packed by 10AM
 The addition of the iconic Doral Resort to the Trump portfolio is one of the most exciting transactions 
 The stock of my shirt and tie maker just hit an all-time high--great going--great product!
 A-Rod  had hip surgery & will be out 6 months. Do you notice all the “druggies” have bad hips.
 The  should break A-Rod's contract immediately—he misrepresented.
 . editor of  explained on radio this morning that I am so widely covered because I draw high interest. True!
  will do great in his new talk show on CBS. He’s really got what it takes!
  QB  is a very special player. He is exciting to watch and smart on the field. Amazing talent.
 How could Michael Forbes get Scot of the Year when he lost—badly—to me & Andy Murray, a true Scot, who won the U.S. Open & Olympic gold?
 Congratulations to David Wright on signing a long term extension with the  David is an exceptional player and person.
 Fan favorite  once again shines in the record 13th season of 'All Star'  He is an amazing & wonderful guy!
  Larry, thank you and keep up the great work!
  Thanks Wendy.
  Thanks, it will be great.
  Thanks.
  But hard work!
 Great defense by the  this weekend—congratulations to  6 points allowed!
 Just won the highest rated sanitary award in NY—an A--& the food is great also. Trump Grill/ 57th & 5th.
 Just completed purchase of magnificent Ritz Carlton in Jupiter, Florida. Will be renamed Trump National Golf Club & be tremendous success.
 The networks are all driving me crazy to do television shows—“a ratings machine”—but because of Apprentice have been loyal to NBC.
 The Democrats have zero intention of coming to any deal on the "fiscal cliff." They will raise taxes and blame it on the Republicans.
   Logan: You are wrong on this-- is a tough & talented guy--& very loyal--a rarity in life.
 Michael Forbes is a loser who failed to stop what was just named “the golf course of the year” and which has brought ...
 ...lots of tourism & jobs to Scotland—Scots must be very embarrassed? 
 Michael Forbes lives in a pigsty and bad liquor company Glenfiddich gave him Scot of the Year award...
 ... over Andy Murray, the US Open winner. Does anyone smell publicity stunt? 
 Comic  bombed at University of Texas at Arlington—crowd was dismal as was his performance—I told you so!
  True!
 I take great pride watching skaters enjoy the #TRUMP Rink in Central Park from my office--world's best skating rink 
  Happy Birthday and best wishes.
 . shines in the record 13th season of ‘All Star’  The Baldwin clan will be proud of Stephen.
 “Attitude is a little thing that makes a big difference.” -- Winston Churchill
 I am watching the New York mayoral race very closely…
 Philadelphia’s Mayor Michael Nutter is in China to drum up business for his struggling city.Our politicians are controlled by the Chinese.
 The Daily Snooze publishes lies about me. They should be ashamed but it will die very soon.
 Congratulations to Jesse Angelo on being named publisher of the  He will do a great job!
 Obama is laughing at Karl Rove & all the losers who spent hundreds of millions of dollars and didn’t win one race, including the big one!
 Karl Rove is now making excuses for his total wasting of $400M—not one win—(the Republicans better get smart next time)...
 ... Time for the Republicans to find someone new—and better.
 Gold just set another record high on price with the largest physical gold sales on record  Inflation is coming...
 Obama is totally “tweaking” the Republicans because he doesn’t respect them—they’ve got to change their ways.
 I am very proud of  for her work with   is a great cause helping children 
 It’s about time for all Americans (Republicans & Democrats) to force our elected officials to start acting fiscally responsible!
 “Trump Brand Expands To South America: The Donald Lends His Name To Luxury Tower In Uruguay”  via 
 . (Brian Williams, anyone?) says women warriors are "every bit as tough as the guys." Just think about that statement!
  Thanks.
  Thank you & the same to you and yours.
  All agree on that--thanks.
 Watch  on  discuss her work with  
  I am, thanks!
  True!
    Thanks
 My  interview discussing how the Democrats want to go over the fiscal cliff & a surprise visit... 
 Was with  yesterday--great golfer, great architect, great guy!
  Work hard and stay focused. Good luck.
 I'll be honored at the Family Business Dynasties Gala in NYC on December 5th. It will be a great event for a great cause.
 As I said on  this a.m., you have to give Obama credit—he won! ...
 ... The Republicans just didn’t resonate with the people—but they will have better days.
 Thank you to  for her wonderful acknowledgement this morning on 
 ... The NY Daily Snooze totally lied and never even called my kids!
  Start with my first book, The Art of the Deal.
  Thx -- Enjoy your visit
  Thank you
  Never give up!
  Happy Birthday!
 Now that it’s almost over, I can’t believe that unions & management couldn’t save Twinkies etc--& management just got a $1.75M bonus.
 I’m surprised that Gabriel Aubry has settled so quickly and easily with Halle—in the long run it was a wise decision.
  Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles--it fronts the Pacific Ocean and is spectacular.
  Try Trump Grill in Trump Tower. Excellent food, good prices. Enjoy your visit.
 In calling my tweets ‘obnoxious,’  says “I sure know how to keep them wanting more.” They are welcome. I just tell it like it is.
 France is losing its businesses and wealth rapidly and day by day.
  Very nice, thanks.
 NYPD Officer Larry DePrimo has made the entire city proud with a his generous act of kindness  NYC loves the NYPD.
      Thanks!
  Motivation is key, so is momentum.
 Congratulations to  for winning November in the cable news rating race with 9 of 10 top shows 
 Team Trump with the recipients of our donations in the Rockaways. #Sandy 
  Hi Sage
   I agree--and thanks.
  Thanks!
  Thanks--you will love it.
    You won't be disappointed!
 Golf Odyssey, one of golf's most respected publications, just named Trump International Golf Links Scotland "golf course of the year"
 Always enjoy appearing on   &  were terrific yesterday.
 A clip from guest hosting  yesterday on  discussing Halle, Angus and Gen. Petraeus 
  March 3rd.
 Back by popular demand, the record 13th season of ‘All Star’  features the return of  Our fans will be happy.
 “He who knows when he can fight and when he cannot, will be victorious.” -- Sun Tzu
 While Derek Jeter is training every day in the off season, reports come out that A-Rod is partying all over the country. Go Derek. 
 .  child molestation sex scandal is the latest in continued downward spiral of BBC.I know personally they do not check for accuracy
 As a favor to my friends at EXTRA, I am co-hosting tonight at 7 p.m. on 
 Crude is about to pass $90/barrel. The OPEC monopoly must be broken. They are robbing our country blind.
 It’s Thursday. How much did OPEC steal from all of us today?
 Steven Spielberg is a great filmmaker. Go see "Lincoln."
   Agreed.
 Trump Tower’s bronze solar glass curtain wall revolutionized Manhattan real estate. It was a major gamble for the design that paid off.
 . is really well produced football. Cris Collinsworth and Al Michaels always do a great job.
 If taxes are raised to avoid the fiscal cliff, then they must be accompanied by tangible, hard cuts on spending everywhere.
 Congratulations to the Rolling Stones on marking their 50th anniversary in London.
 Back by popular demand, the always ‘interesting’  is up to his old tricks in the upcoming All Star 
 If you treat people right they will treat you right...ninety percent of the time. -- Franklin D. Roosevelt
 Hope everyone enjoyed their Thanksgiving. But get ready, our country is in big trouble!
 My kids never negatively discussed my criticism of President Obama with me or anyone...it's not in their nature!
 The dishonest NY Daily News reporter advised my rep in writing, "story is dead" and then put it out anyway. A total lie and she knew it!
 The dying NY Daily News put out a false report about my kids not wanting me to criticize Obama...totally false!
 HAPPY THANKSGIVING to everyone--I love you all, even my many enemies (sometimes!).
 “I also protect myself by being flexible. I never get too attached to one deal or one approach.” – THE ART OF THE DEAL
 On December 19th the  pageant will be broadcast live in over 190 countries to one billion viewers. 
 I am having 600 Thanksgiving dinners sent to the Rockaways--prepared by my wonderful Trump Grill/Trump Tower staff. #SandyRelief
 For those asking, my son,  makes zero $$ running his charity & raises a great deal of $$, all of it for  
 Direct foreign investments continue to flow into China at over $100B a year  That's money that could be spent here.
 I hope Washington makes a good deal to avert the fiscal cliff. Both sides need to work together.
 Pres. Obama’s steady support of  throughout this crisis helped stop the war. He did a good job.
 . is once again at the top of her game in the upcoming All Star season of  Amazing in the boardroom...
 . has just been awarded the AAA Five Diamond Award. Congratulations to the team for this great recognition of their amazing work.
 ...and an optimist is one who makes opportunities of his difficulties." -- Harry S. Truman
 The Holiday Season in New York City is a very special time. I love seeing and meeting the many tourists who visit the #TRUMP Tower atrium.
  It will be great!
  Thanks!
  Thanks!
  Work hard!
   True!
  Thanks!
  I am very truthful!
  Love what you do!
  Thank you!
  A great compliment.
  Thanks Keith!
 Obama met with Chinese Premier Wen yesterday  and talked trade. The Chinese are robbing us blind--be tough!
 France was just stripped of its AAA bond rating. With the PMs radical tax rates...
 ...expect the country to be further downgraded in the future. The rich are all leaving!
 I was nice to loser  and she attacked me--it just shows never let up with a bully. They only fade when you hit them hard!
 I am going to give  a pass.  is desperate to get back on TV so she can be on yet another show that can be quickly canceled.
 A must read for any country or community considering wind turbines. 
 The EU just dropped their self-imposed carbon tax. I bet they wish they had all that money back!
   Thanks Mike
 “Even such traits as who makes the most eye contact in conversation can be an indication of who seeks to dominate.” Think Like A Billionaire
 EU countries now want to charge multinationals major taxes. See, I told you so!
 The upcoming All Star season of  has  returning to compete. She doesn’t disappoint!
 The  is doing amazing work helping the children...
 ... at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital  -- I am proud of you Eric.
 FLASHBACK – “Donald Trump Answers Boy’s Prayer for New Bike”  via 
 I gave out the Male Athlete of the Year Award last night to my friend  Olympic medals—a record that will never be broken.
 We should remember that during this entire Petraeus episode,over 50 of our nation's bravest have died in Afghanistan...
 ... It is time to get out and rebuild our own nation.
 Washington must come together on a deal to avoid a fiscal cliff. If taxes are raised, they must come with real, hard cuts.
  Thanks.
 How come every time I show anger, disgust or impatience, enemies say I had a tantrum or meltdown—stupid or dishonest people?
 Businesses have already started massive layoffs and reducing employees’ hours due to Obama Care. Reality is setting in.
 Surprise-In a post-election delayed release, food stamp rolls surged to biggest monthly increase and an all-time high 
 Yesterday was Veterans Day. I hope our armed service members felt appropriately honored. This nation loves and respects all of you.
 My profile in  “Doing What You Like Doing” 
 “Donald Trump Hits NYC Bar Mitzvah -You're My Jewprentice”  via 
 Anne Hathaway was great on Saturday Night Live  her singing voice is amazing!
 Just saw my new line of shirts, ties & suits  -- they are fantastic! Would make great holiday presents!
 Last season the Apprentice was the #1 show on television on Sunday night from 10 to 11--this season's show is even better!
 We just passed 1.9M followers & gained over 250,000 followers in the last month.Thank you--let's have fun and do business.
   Thanks, & I love the people of Aberdeen.
  Thanks!
 Tourism is booming because of it. RT  Just been to the fantastic  golf links in Aberdeen. Quality stuff
 According to UK newspapers, no wind turbines have been ordered for many months in Britain--an obsolete technology that ruins communities!
 When someone attacks me, I always attack back...except 100x more. This has nothing to do with a tirade but rather, a way of life!
 I am a very calm person but love tweeting about both scum and positive subjects. Whenever I tweet, some call it a tirade..totally dishonest!
 Trump International Golf Links was just rated one of the greatest courses in the world. Virtually all reviews are saying the same thing. 
 The people of Scotland love Trump International Golf Links.
 Aberdeen tourism is booming because of my great Scottish golf club. 
 Many political pundits are using the term "Art of the Deal".... they should thank me. That is my term and book title.
 Thanks- many are saying I'm the best 140 character writer in the world. It's easy when it's fun.
 I love Twitter.... it's like owning your own newspaper--- without the losses.
 I'm a skeptical guy, but I don't believe Petraeus used this to get out of the Benghazi hearings.
 Wow,  I never saw the Petraeus thing coming. A straight laced guy! Very sad for him and his family.
 I just passed a 10 block long gas line going to LGA airport, a terrible situation!
 Everybody wants me to talk about Robert Pattinson and not Brian Williams—I guess people just don’t care about Brian!
 She’s baaack!  needs me to salvage her dying career. But it won’t help-- she’s got no talent & no persona. Too many tv cancellations!
 Price gouging at many gas stations, $10 a gallon--welcome to the new world.
 It’s hard to believe that we are rationing gas in NYC. OPEC is laughing all the way to the bank.
 . Condolences on the passing of your uncle, and best wishes.
 . Only the stupid  would air your garbage—no wonder they are in such deep trouble.
 . Anthony—did you illegally take clips from the Letterman  show and  without their approval?
 . I predict somebody is going to sue you!
 . Dummy,thanks for increasing awareness of my big golf project in Aberdeen—sales are thru the roof & Aberdeen seeing big benefits.
 . your documentary cost you less than $3,000 to make—where did you get that kind of money?
 . documentary works better than any sleeping pill—in fact that may be your only way to make money with this recycled garbage!
 Why do so many people say I hate President Obama—I don’t hate the President at all. I just disagree with his policies!
    is a huge hit all over the world. Your cheap & boring documentary is a tremendous flop.
 9 million fewer people voted for Obama this election than last & yet the Republicans lost—do you think they might be doing something wrong!
 I got to know  very well—he is a great guy who will do the right thing for the country!
 I received such a nice letter today from someone who took refuge in Trump Tower during Sandy. It was my pleasure to help.
 Robert Pattinson is putting on a good face for the release of Twilight. He took my advice on Kristen Stewart...I hope!
 The election was a major setback for economy. All young entrepreneurs should be sure to calculate Obama's policies into their investments.
 Of the 9 battleground states, we only carried North Carolina. I'm proud of  & glad I delivered keynote at their state convention.
 Remember to watch the series finale of "The Men Who Built America" this Sunday at 8/7c on 
 Polls show that the hurricane had a huge positive effect for Obama on his win- isn't that ridiculous?
 Romney campaign used me in 6 primary states and won every one- they should have used me in Florida and Ohio & he would be President.
 Remember to watch the series finale of "The Men Who Built America" this Sunday at 8/7c on 
 China is heavily investing in building its own jet engine  They will end up stealing the design from us as usual.
 China's submarines will soon be carrying nukes  They will be sent to patrol our coasts, Obama won't do anything.
 China's Communist Party has now publicly praised Obama's reelection. They have never had it so good. Will own America soon.
 At the end of the day, Obama won the battleground states by less than 500,000 votes. This was a winnable race. GOP needs to do better!
 With taxes set to go up and Obama about to cut the mortgage deduction, now is the time to buy a house if you can. Can get a great deal.
 . I'm sending you a check to help find a cure.  says hi.
 No surprise that all the foreign countries are celebrating Obama's win. They love a weak America that they can rip off.
 Obama's administration is now openly admitting it expects US credit downgraded again  Thanks for letting us know now
 I will and I agree! RT   you can't possibly make any more money. so why don't you make a difference instead?!
 I started to get very worried about Mitt's chances when I heard that A-Rod donated to his campaign. Everything A-Rod touches turns bad.
 Russian leaders are publicly celebrating Obama's reelection. They can't wait to see how flexible Obama will be now.
 It is that time of the year. The Trump Wollman Skating Rink is open to the public in Central Park. The greatest ice rink in the country.
 Letterman  had Brian Williams  as guest last night, I was on last Thursday
 ...I trounced him in ratings & Letterman beat  last Thursday. Brian—are you irrelevant?
 Like  Obama is incompetent!
  is incompetent and will have tremendous liability to Briarcliff Manor and Trump National!
  doesn't even respond to the people in Briarcliff...like a forgotten area.
  is terrible...don't know what they are doing. Trump National Briarcliff and all houses are totally blacked out!
  will turn this mess around!
 Make sure you get out and vote...most important election of our generation...go Romney!
 Trump Hotels are delivering lots of food to storm victims...we love doing it!
 Gary Johnson is asking people "to waste" their vote on him. Make it count - vote for 
 We don’t want to have a recount in any of the battleground states. Obama will steal it. Make sure all your friends and family vote.
 Obama's war on women has lead to the biggest decline in female employment in 40 years. 4 more years??
 . is out on the trail saying "you'll vote for me in 2016." Is he serious?
 Undecideds in OH,PA and WI will make the difference. All should ask themselves if they want $6/gallon gas because it will come under Obama.
 Pennsylvania is in play  All undecideds in Philly suburbs should ask themselves - who do you trust most on 
 I think  should take this challenge. Axelrod was too scared. RT:  Kaufstache vs. Sharpstache.
 In the heart of the city, Trump International Toronto is the city's most elite property  True luxury at its finest.
 Considering Obama hasn’t proposed anything concrete, if he wins he won’t have a mandate. Another 4 years of legislative stalemate.
 Members from Obama's own job council are endorsing   Not surprising
 Concerns over the national debt are stopping businesses from hiring and expanding  Obama's policies are unsustainable
 Castro, Chavez and Ahmadinejad are all anxiously awaiting our election results. They are praying Obama wins.
 Obama promised 5.2% unemployment by October 2012. His promises are worthless!
 Make sure to catch  season finale of “The Men Who Built America” on Sun, November 11th. Great show.
 Reality TV’s #1 Bad Girl  is back on the upcoming 13th season of All Star  She is great as always.
 Could be the hurricane helps  are rioting in the streets over gasoline
 A wonderful place. 
 Global warming is based on faulty science and manipulated data which is proven by the emails that were leaked 
 Obama has destroyed the middle class. In ’09, median household income was $55,198. Now it is $50,678. Four more years?
 I have an idea for A-Rod---buy a home at  overlooking the Pacific--will bring you better luck.
 A-Rod is now looking for an expensive home in Beverly Hills--why aren't the  terminating his contract for misrepresentation?
 . should sit Michael Vick. He is a great athlete but less than average quarterback.
 Obama our Welfare & Food Stamp President, is praising himself for expanding welfare  He doesn't believe in work.
 Unemployment is now 7.9%. Four years and $6.5T later, that is really bad!
  It is Trump water--thanks.
 How about President Obama fixing the gasoline situation instead of taking photo ops in the destruction.
 . is an unprofessional hack who belongs  with all the other Obama hacks.
 Looks like  is full of it.  "Jeep, an Obama favorite, looks to shift production to China" 
 Interestingly, the hurricane may now be a disaster for Obama's reelection because of his grandstanding.
 People are struggling to get gasoline for their cars--we are like a third world country.
 I'm sending lots of bottled water out to Staten Island & Long Island.
 . came to my Trump Tower office to apologize for calling me a racist--very nice, apology accepted!
 . called my office to ask me to do election night coverage with her--sadly, I won't be able to do it.
 . of Chrysler should focus on design rather than filthy language--not very professional.
 We should not allow  to move  jobs to China after they said they wouldn't--stay tuned!
 . disputes my statement--but watch Chrysler move  jobs to China after the election.
 With long gas lines & total disarray from storm, the hurricane may yet be a negative for Obama.
 It was announced this morning that unemployment rose--this can't be good for Obama.
 Next year I will be changing the name of 800 acre Doral to Trump National Doral. It will be the best resort in the country—Miami is hot!
 I will start reviewing various political reporters etc & websites as to their professionalism & fairness—many people asking for this.
 How could Obama leave those American heroes out to die in Benghazi? And he continues to lie to the public!
 What is your thought as to why Obama refused millions for charity and did not show his records and applications?
 Nice to see Obama released a situation room photo from Sandy. How about releasing the photo taken during Benghazi?
 Everybody knows why Obama would not show his college applications --- they are just not willing to say!
 If I would have offered Obama a billion dollars to show his records, he would have refused.
 My video response to President Obama's lack of transparency. 
 Press release. Video response to follow. 
 I will soon be releasing my response to the fact that President Obama refused to show his applications and records to the public.
 President Obama missed the deadline!
 Obama is a terrible negotiator. He bails out Chrysler and now Chrysler wants to send all Jeep manufacturing to China--and will!
 Why is Obama’s auto bailout now creating jobs in China? He is ruining American industry.
 To all  supporters, make sure you have taken advantage of early voting now so you can GOTV on election day.
 “Romney’s $2 Billion Sacrifice for America” By Chris Ruddy  
 You know the world is crazy when New York gets hit by a hurricane-- and Florida doesn't.
 Let's continue to destroy the competitiveness of our factories & manufacturing so we can fight mythical global warming. China is so happy!
 Do you believe  is blaming global warming for the hurricane?
 From 1954 to 1960 there were 10 major hurricanes that hit the East Coast.
 It's 10 AM: Two hours to go for Obama to easily pick up millions for charity!
 Not one Trump building, even those along the Hudson River, lost power --- a testament to quality systems and construction.
 The polls & momentum are trending towards  Don't let the hurricane change your thinking!
 Fans shouldn't worry. We have adjusted the filming schedule of the upcoming 13th season of  appropriately due to the storm.
 China’s stock market rose yesterday after 4 consecutive days of losses  Their market gains the day we are hit by storm
 Maybe Obama should donate my $5M to the families of the 17 who have lost loved ones during the storm?
 Scary. Obama and the Democrat Senate have accrued over $5T worth of debt without passing a budget in the last 3 years. 4 more years?
 People are happy that I left the Trump Tower atrium open as opposed to taking the easy way out. 
 Why does Obama believe he shouldn't comply with record releases that his predecessors did of their own volition? Hiding something?
   RT if you think Pres.Obama should release his records to get $5M for charity--for Red Cross or another great charity
 Glad to hear that  will be co-hosting the Grammy nominations special on 12.5. Taylor is terrific!
 Let’s be honest, if Obama thought he could get away with campaigning during the storm, then he would have been in Ohio on Monday.
 How did Obama go to a Las Vegas fundraiser on 9.12, the day after he refused to send help to Americans in Benghazi?
 I never fall for scams. I am the only person who immediately walked out of my ‘Ali G’ interview
 Another great cause Obama could send my $5M donation to is a charity for 9/11 First Responders. They are American heroes.
 My  interview discussing the 57th St. crane, damage from the storm and extending my $5M offer to Obama 
 My  interview before Hurricane Sandy explaining that I would be staying in Trump Tower during the storm 
 These last 4 years have not had a single quarter over 4% GDP. Obama has overseen the weakest economic recovery in American history.
 The election is trending towards  Americans know we can't afford another 4 years of the Obama economic decline.
 So many incredible friends said thanks for TT help --- I say thanks to you! 
 The Trump Tower atrium is such a great place & kept thousands of people warm & safe during the storm--thanks, staff!
 . Charity should get the money!
  Dopey, few have built more than me.
 Remember this: Obama wants to raise taxes,  wants to lower taxes--need I say more!
 Don't let Obama buy the election by handing out unlimited free money to states.
 People having a great time in the Trump Tower atrium --- unlike others, I stayed open. 
 I am the best builder but if that were my building with the crane mishap, I would have been lambasted from coast to coast.
 Because of the hurricane, I am extending my 5 million dollar offer for President Obama's favorite charity until 12PM on Thursday.
 Not only giving out money, but Obama will be seen today standing in water and rain like he is a real President --- don't fall for it.
 Hurricane is good luck for Obama again- he will buy the election by handing out billions of dollars.
 I saw from my window just before accident that the crane was not properly anchored for the storm.
 The water damage to NYC is amazing. The winds were bad but the water was worse.
 All weights are on crane's wrong side --- very precarious below, move out!
 If authorities need direct view from top of Trump Tower, call office.
 Direct view of crane from apartment window. Crane was never properly secured, blowing in the breeze. 
 We are taking care of hundreds of people in the Trump Tower atrium--they are seeking refuge. Free coffee and food.
 So far the hurricane is being handled very well in NY, not nearly as bad as stated on news. Let's see what happens later.
 Many people walked out on Madonna's concert when she told them to vote for Obama. Years ago I walked out because the concert was terrible!
 I always said Obama is lucky for himself but unlucky for the country. The storm could be very good for him as he (cont) 
 Obama lied 100% about Libya and the killings--emails are absolute. He must release his records on Wednesday and stop the lies.
 Dave Letterman  said during my interview that Obama was "probably" born in the US--the word "probably" is a disaster for Obama.
 I'm not hearing much from Obama or his administration about my $5M offer to charity or to which charity the money will go.
 What people don't know about  is that he was a terrible student and not considered smart in his early (cont) 
 . who got thrown off ABC for being stupid, is always so nice to me to my face and constantly asking (cont) 
 I guess  saw my ratings on the  the other night where Letterman beat Leno. Bill, you are no Letterman.
 While  is an extremely unattractive woman, I refuse to say that because I always insist on being politically correct.
 . talks about my hair but I'm not allowed to talk about her ugly face or body --- so I won't. Is this a double standard?
 But whenever she sees me, she kisses my ass. She's disgusting. 
 I never liked  persona or singing and haven't heard her name in years.
 Now grotesque  is into the Trump act --- trying to become relevant again.
 Many people are saying that my challenge to Obama is having a huge negative effect on his poll numbers --- I agree.
 A lot changed when David Letterman said " he was probably born in this country"--- the word probably is a total disaster for Obama.
 I defended  against  on The Apprentice when  was making a fool out of her --- (cont) 
 I defended  when she lied about her stomach operation to lose weight --- only to get blindsided by her on the 
 Before  begged me to put her on The Apprentice she was “professionally dead.” I saved her tiny (cont) 
 I am going to the  game with  the owner of the team, a great guy.
  is taking major heat for calling the president lazy. But the president stated his weakness is that he is lazy. Fight on John!
  That's more than O'Reilly did ...and he is supposed to be my friend. You're terrific!
  McGuirk Thanks for being so nice and defending me on O'Reilly...you're terrific!
 Alert...The president knew that the ambassador was being attacked in Benghazi. He did nothing...he is no leader.
  tries so hard to be a star. But, he just doesn't have what it takes...and he never will.
 I put  on Apprentice at his request, I did his failed cable show as a favor to him then he knocks me for my Obama announcement.
 I want to end the day by saying there is no check I would rather write than that to a good charity designated by our President.
 The TODAY Show should call me about who to put on the show— I know more about people who get ratings than anyone.
 Before Star Jones begged me to put her on The Apprentice she was “professionally dead.” I saved her tiny... 
 I hear they are very unhappy w/ Arianna and  at  I’ll bet she won’t be there for long!
 Watch Obama's favorability numbers drop even further if he doesn't accept my charitable offer. No one approves (cont) 
 If Obama doesn't accept my offer to be fully transparent, what will he say?
 If my offer is refused, every undecided OH voter will be fully aware that Obama denied $5M to charity all because he is hiding something!
 Barack Obama has everything to gain. Why would anyone ever deny $5M to charity?
 Great! Last night  winner  & alumni  packed OH stadium rallying w/  
 Sarah Jessica Parker voted “unsexiest woman alive” – I agree. She said “it’s beneath me to comment on the... 
 I have decided to add a caveat to my offer. Obama can't decide to send my $5M to Rev. Wright if he releases his records.
 My fellow Tea Party friends in Ohio--make sure you take advantage of early voting so you can GOTV election day. Know you can! Must win Ohio.
 Where's the transparency? Despite Obama's denial  stands by report he just talked with Jeremiah Wright.
 Looking forward to being the special guest at tonight's Dutchess County #GOP dinner--to a SOLD OUT crowd. It will be great fun.
 Pretty audacious for Obama to call  a BSer when he has lied about so much we don't have room to write.
 By the way, where is  Good question. 4 years ago she strongly supported Obama--now she is silent. Anyway, who cares, I adore Oprah.
 ...Colin Powell thought Iraq has weapons of mass destruction.
 Obama is about to destroy the mililtary through the sequester. The Middle East is a mess. Yet Colin Powell still endorses him. Wonder why?
 Be careful of an Obama "bomb" to win election! Would be a horrible thing to do.
 The election is still close but trending toward  He leads all national polls and Obama's likeability is imploding. VOTE!
 Wow! Letterman show  won the ratings last night big time--and guess who was his guest? DJT
 One of my many Twitter followers suggested Obama should take my offer & give $1,250,000 to each family of the four... 
 Watch me explain on the  how my charitable offer to Obama changes the election and is about transparency 
 A clip from last night's  where I detail my charitable offer to Obama and Dave describes his terrible grades 
  True!
 What a dumb mistake AOL made buying the  How much longer will Arianna last--I predict not much.
  Thanks, I hope you enjoyed it, had a great time.
   I agree.
   Thanks, it was a great show..
   Thanks I will.
 Stupid Arianna  hired the man who ruined the once-great NYTimes Business Section...
 ...a real loser named Tim O'Brien--and it's never recovered.
 Dopey Arianna  is really after me--boring story after boring story...but I hear she is in big trouble!
 I knew last year that  Magazine lost all credibility when they didn't include me in their Top 100...
 ... I will soon start naming magazines that I think will fold--I predicted Newsweek.
  Great idea.
  I hope so for the charity's sake
  Thanks Tylar
 The Letterman show really turned things around- people finally understand my $5 million dollar offer to charity.... 
  I love the Wounded Warriors--Obama should choose that as his $5M charity.
  Sounds like a good idea.
  Only because he has something to hide.
 . Re: Taylor and Conor--great news for Taylor!
 Based on the ovation last night from the Letterman  audience, I believe it will be hard for Obama to throw $5M down the drain....
 ....instead of giving to a wonderful charitable cause.
 Another great charity that the $5M could go to just a recommendation to the Pres. - the Wounded Warriors represented so well by 
 Lots of response that Obama should give the $5M to the families of our great heroes who were murdered in Benghazi.
 Letterman  was great last night. I had a lot of fun. You could see his audience really wanted Obama to take the $ for charity.
 It is really a shame that Barack Obama may stop $5M from being generously donated to charity all because he refuses to be transparent.
 Doing David Letterman  tonight at 11:30. 1st nite of Sweeps.Going into the lion's den but I've been there many times before. Enjoy
 Six days and counting until my offer to Barack Obama expires...
 For someone who demanded 20 years of Mitt's tax returns, you would think my offer to donate $5M to charity for his records is an easy go.
 Yesterday Barack Obama said he wants "wind turbines manufactured here in China"  I don't think this was a gaffe.
 China is primed to continue to rob us and steal our jobs through their exports  We need  to rein them in.
 I hope Derek Jeter’s recovery is going well. He is a very special player and a great guy. New York loves him. 
  has really become a laughing stock of good political reporting.
 What will be the response on Wednesday? If Obama doesn't take the 5 million dollars for charity.
  I fully supported McCain but when he lost, hoped Obama would be great for U.S. --- he wasn't.
 . shouldn’t be too upset over  He will always do great!
 I am offering the chance for Barack Obama to redistribute $5M to any charity of his choice. Everyone wins. Take the deal.
 “Our side needs Donald Trump.” --  on  show last night. Thanks Ann.
 .  did you choose me as one of the 10 Most Fascinating People of the Year last season (and more than once?)
 .  will apologize to me just like she did when I was right about  Besides, I get great ratings on The View.
 .  Barbara, unfortunately you've missed the entire point of my announcement--you just don't get it!
 Still waiting for an explanation about why  &  did not name their son Donald. Unbelievable.
 Miss Universe 2012 Pageant will be airing live on  &  december 19th. Open invite stands for Robert Pattinson.
 Excited to announce that  &  will be hosting the 2012 Miss Universe Pageant. Great ratings for Miss Universe.
 How does  get a conservative platform? She is a dummy--just look at her past.
 The  will die just like Newsweek--same management.
 I am happy to have started #ObamasFavoriteCharity. Really enjoying reading everyone's tweets.
 My  interview discussing my $5M charitable offer to Obama, his lack of transparency & my tremendous support 
 Just stated by a total pro: "You are the only one who has the guts to say what we are all thinking."
 Glad to hear North Carolina is solid for  It started trending for Mitt solidly after my speech at the  convention.
 In light the Benghazi emails released last night, it is apparent that Obama has no problem lying to the American public...
 ... By releasing his records, he can come clean with the American people and have $5 million go to a charity.
 Obama has no problem leaking national security secrets. Why can't he release his records? Especially when $5M is going to charity.
 I am happy to donate $5 million to a charity Barack Obama chooses. All I am asking is that he is transparent with the American people
 I just learned that  has no credibility--total phonies that don't report the truth. A puppet of Obama?
 Glad to hear  supports my offer to Obama. As Sean says “it is an easy $5 million to charity. What does Obama have to lose?”
 Third rate  took every negative tweet or response they could find & put it out--when in fact the response is incredibly positive.
 My offer to Obama is about transparency. In 2008, American people were sold on hope and change. This our last chance to get the full record.
 Virtually all Presidents and candidates including John McCain, Bill Clinton, George H.W. Bush, and George W. Bush... 
 The response has been fantastic--- actually overwhelming! Thank you!
 As stated, here is the press release. 
 You have all been waiting-- the response has been amazing! Watch my announcement now, press release to follow at 12:15. 
 All predictions re: my 12 o'clock release are totally incorrect. Stay tuned!
 Story will be released today at 12 noon EST on Twitter and Facebook.
 This is not a media event or about Donald J. Trump--- this is about the United States of America. I will be... 
 This is not a media event or about Donald J. Trump--- this is about the United States of America. I will be (cont) 
 If you like having the world collapse and being told America is leading from behind--vote Obama.
 No wonder  is in such big trouble & boss was just fired--they are lost.
 . should never have played that piece of garbage documentary--& yet the phones are ringing off the hook to play the course.
 ...that it was hard not to end up rooting for Trump..."
 Thank you to  reviewer  who stated "'You've Been Trumped' was so biased in favour of the protesters...
 . did an excellent job as debate moderator last night. I only wish Mitt was more aggressive!
 Everyone is asking me to speak more on Robert & Kristen.I don't have time except to say "Robert, drop her, she cheated on you & will again!"
 Last night was the first time Obama said "we" instead of "I" in respect to Bin Laden's killing.
 Barack Obama said absolutely not 3 times before he agreed to go after Bin Laden--- now he wants all of the credit!
 My announcement is tomorrow!
 Tomorrow I will be tweeting on only one subject!
 China will never go to war with us because if they won they would only take over property they already own!
 Mitt Romney must start congratulating the Navy Seals and military on Bin Laden’s killing, not the President.
 . should have been more aggressive last night. Yet some polls have him winning the debate.
 My  interview discussing last night’s presidential debate, my stock picks and tomorrow’s big announcement 
 The military and Navy Seals should be given more credit for Bin Laden's death, not Obama, who works hard to take (cont) 
 When the military informed Obama that they had Bin Laden, is there anyone with a brain that would not have said "Ok, go get him"?
 Doesn't the US have better things to do than to destroy an American hero for the world to see? Now other (cont) 
 Lance Armstrong fought for 7 years & then just ran out of energy. Very sad story--although they caught him red handed.He definitely cheated!
 No matter what happens in the election,  deserves a lot of credit. He has kept Obama in it, even with his terrible record.
 I always said that  had to keep fighting the charges. By stopping, he gave his enemies an opening.
 70% of the Chinese say they are better off than they were 4 years ago  At least someone has done well under Obama.
 The debate was pretty even but I thought Mitt should have been much more aggressive on Obama's failed foreign policy-- and I mean much more.
 Debate was somewhat hard to watch last night. Viewership will be way down.
 I will be doing  at 7:30.
 Stop congratulating Obama for killing Bin Laden. The Navy Seals killed Bin Laden. #debate
 . looks much calmer, and Obama should stop nodding his head backwards and forward.
 Bob Schieffer will do a great job tonight. Always treated me fairly.
 Well this is it, the final debate- let's see how it goes. I'll be tweeting live.
 I have watched  for years-- she will bring jobs & business back to Connecticut--incredible woman!
 My good friends in Connecticut have a great opportunity to send an amazing businesswoman to Washington. Vote for  for Senate!
 Former Obama White House economic adviser  gave his old boss a 'C' on the economy  Pretty generous!
  Thanks--a great compliment.
  Thanks--and doing great business from all over the world.
 Why don't we ask the Navy SEALs who killed Bin Laden? They don't seem to be happy with Obama claiming credit. All he did is say O.K.
 . keeps winning the ratings race   That’s why he is a  Champion!
 I look forward to  hitting Obama hard tonight for lying about Benghazi. CIA told Obama it was a terrorist attack after 24 hrs.
 Everybody is asking about my announcement this Wednesday concerning Barack Obama---just wait and see!
 . will a great job tonight--he is a real pro and respected by both sides.
 ...even though Obama dumped the Reverend like Robert should dump Kristin.
 According to  Obama spoke to Rev. Wright about getting out the black vote  No surprise that they still speak...
 Everyone knows I am right that Robert Pattinson should dump Kristen Stewart. In a couple of years, he will thank me. Be smart, Robert.
 Obama is an easy target on foreign policy. has many openings to attack, especially when Obama starts bragging about Bin Laden.
 Congrats to Scotland's Sunday Post Newspaper for its front page article  http://someotherlink.com/
 Obama planted that  story on Iran so it will be discussed in tonight's debate. He wants Libya and China off the table.
 Tomorrw is #TRUMPTuesday on  Be sure to tune in at 7:30AM EST.
   Dopey, I never went bankrupt.
  Ken--Thanks--I am proud of you. Great job on tour this year--I always knew.
  Thanks!
   Thanks--it needs a lot of work.
  Austin--thanks!
 The brass in #TRUMP Tower's atrium is polished twice a month like clockwork. I keep the atrium impeccable. Key to its success!
 ...now  doesn't like me--who cares!
 I refused to comply with Scotland's First Minister  'compassionate' treatment of terrorist Megrahi (Pan Am #103--270 dead)...
 The  is widely criticized for a lack of professionalism. We dealt with a Roger Mosey--a total lightweight who doesn't have a clue.
 . I felt very sorry for you during your meltdown on  He drove you insane but, of course, Piers is a lot smarter than you
 The  is in total disarray. I know personally how bad they are -- pathetic. 
 My son Don and his wife Vanessa just had a beautiful baby boy named Spencer Frederick --very thrilling.
  Dopey, I never went bankrupt
 Looking forward to my interview on the Howie Carr Show at 5:30PM today. Tune in New Hampshire! 
 Last week I had  tweet of the week and the most retweeted  mention twice . Can anyone else top that? Don't think so!
 Had a great time watching the   game yesterday at Gillette Stadium. Great and exciting game.
 The Lion, The Witch And Donald Trump's Wardrobe"  By  
 I wish tonight's debate would cover more than foreign policy.
 Visiting Virginia? Be sure to visit the Trump Vineyard Estates in Charlottesville  Winner of the Five Star Diamond Award
 Don't let Obama play the Iran card in order to start a war in order to get elected--be careful Republicans!
 . when you are fired from MSNBC for your bad ratings and racist coverage, stop by and say hello.
 Autism rates through the roof--why doesn't the Obama administration do something about doctor-inflicted autism. We lose nothing to try.
 We should march on Washington re:autism--with leadership & common sense the numbers would drop precipitously!
 Lots of autism and vaccine response. Stop these massive doses immediately. Go back to single, spread out shots! What do we have to lose.
 “Trump lawyers seek windfarm public inquiry”  via 
 New Hampshire is a critical state for both candidates this year. I got to know New Hampshire and love it.
 “Donald Trump on the radio in New Hampshire”  via   Morning Score.
 Via  "Donald Trump claims Barack Obama bombshell" 
 My  interview discussing Lance Armstrong losing his titles, Obama's foreign policy & my BIG announcement 
 Stay tuned for my big Obama announcement--- probably on Wednesday. 
 People are going crazy with my comments on Diet Coke (soda). Let's face it--this stuff just doesn't work. It makes you hungry.
 The anti-wind turbine movement in Scotland against  is amazing--keep going Scots, save your country!
 Obama should stop talking about wind turbines--they are a disaster for a country or community & are very expensive & unreliable.
 I will be live tweeting during the debate tonight.
 Derek, get well soon, the  need youl.
 Gas prices are at crazy levels--fire Obama!
 Sleepy Eyes  owes  an apology. Jack is right on unemployment--the new jobless claims make 7.8% an impossibility.
 Don Butler and executives are doing a great job at  the cars are fantastic.
 The biggest problem with A-Rod is he is bad for the chemistry of the Yankees--- he must go.
 Fort Hood shooting should be declared a terror attack. Respect the wounded and dead.
 Good luck to Derek on his operation. I know it will be a success--- he is a great champion.
 Derek must move back into one of my buildings immediately. It will be lucky for him like in past.
 Derek Jeter broke ankle one day after he sold his apartment in Trump World Tower.
 7.8% unemployment number is a complete fraud as evidenced by the jobless claims number released yesterday.Real unemployment is at least 15%
 .  convention came in over $3M under budget. Barack’s  convention is over $10M in debt. What a surprise!
 No surprise, welfare spending is up over 30% under Obama.  He is the food stamp & welfare "king"
 Can't wait for  to fold which, under Graydon Carter, will be sooner rather than later.
 . terrible piece on Mitt's faith is a new low, even for them.
 Where were all the  exposes on "When Rev. Wright disciples go to Washington?" Sad!
 Follow  jewelry line on  site 
 Rev.  is a great man and so is his son, Franklin Graham.
 Rev. is doing tremendous work this election cycle educating the Christian community on 
 Both Barack and  were excellent at the Al Smith dinner last night!
 A lot of the  should be ashamed of their play in the post season. They are lucky they don't have to deal with George Steinbrenner.
 I hope  of America handle their problems a lot better than the board at Penn State did. You can't do any worse!
  Toledo is a great place--I've been there & worked in Cincinnati for 2 years--I love Ohio.
   I think Gaga is great--her 1st major appearance at my Miss Universe Pageant in Vietnam/6 yrs ago Should give me 25%
 Newly released NH poll has  with a 1 point lead. Mitt will pull away next week.
 Obama has called Libya attack "a bump in the road" and "not optimal." Just come clean already--tell Americans the truth!
 Maybe Derek Jeter should ask A-Rod about renting his apartment next year. Very soon A-Rod won't need a place in NYC.
 Yes--I will be live tweeting during the final debate this coming Monday.
 Via  "Donald Trump is NOT A-Rod fan 
  No, sadly, not even close!
  sound great!
  Visit Trump Tower
 My  interview discussing Google's Q3 earnings release, my facebook stock purchase and the debates 
 My interview with  discussing the real unemployment number and how the 7.8% number is a fraud 
 . is no bargain but I don't like John Mayer--he dates and tells--be careful Katy (just watch!).
 Some of you were asking about the All-Star line-up for Celebrity Apprentice 
 So many tweets & stories on Stewart/Pattinson Look, it doesn't matter-- the relationship will never be the same. It is permanently broken.
   No, I said U.S. destroyed a once American icon
 Congratulations to Bernie Marcus & Herman Cain  on the #TruthTour2012--All employers need to check this out!
 For the truth about job creation in America go to  A great site for employers to get the tools & information they need!
 . really blew it--went down in flames--too bad!
 I guess they don’t have freedom of the press in Scotland. We created this ad and the ASA would not allow us to (cont) 
 Why would Ohio listen to Bruce Springsteen reading his lines? Be careful or I will go to Ohio and  will win it!
  Thanks!
   I agree, but their careers weren't fueled by drugs.
 Obama said "not optimal" to Ambassador & embassy killings--bad word usage for a Harvard graduate.
 . did a great job last night. Watch the clip! 
  Never give up. You have what it takes.
 Great decision by Donald Graham  to sell. I'll now have to take my newsweek covers off the wall.
 With Barry Diller & Tina Brown in charge, did anyone doubt that  would be a massive failure?
 It is a great honor to have helped the community so much. 
 Something really bad happened to the  psyche--much like our President!
 . should get rid of A-Rod ASAP--I can't watch this guy anymore!
 . Thanks--you sound great!
   Thanks for the info Rosie--get well.
 I'll be making a major announcement on President Obama next week--stay tuned!
 Can't believe we are less than three weeks away from the election. Time certainly flies!
 The Yankees are absolutely terrible--- what happened to this team?
  I love India!
 Hey  is your recovery going? I hope you are doing well so we can start fighting again soon!
   Bob Kraft & Coach Bill are far too smart!
     Good luck!
   I hope that's the reason--otherwise, just plain stupid.
  A total professional.
  Greatly appreciated, thanks.
  Great to meet you also.
   I was referring, of course, to Bill Clinton's statement on the economy.
  I have a friend that wants to meet your sister.
 My Trump Home Mattress Collection by Serta is setting records--they are really phenomenal. You can order them at 
 The last time I visited China I couldn't believe all the construction. You can go up with a project in a week--no red tape.
 It's Thursday. How much money did Barack Obama waste today on crony green energy projects?
 Clinton commented in Ohio today that  is right, the economy has not been fixed under Obama.I always said Bill was an honest man.
 When Strasburg leaves  for another team for more money, will Washington still like the decision to shut him down for his good?
 Bad sign for Obama's campaign now publicly admitting they are focused on 4 states. Their internals must be horrendous.
 While the next season of  is packed w/ All Stars, ours fans will be happy to see  in the board room.She is back!
 Derek Jeter  wants to rent an apartment. Derek--only in a Trump building--Trump is lucky for you.
 Now there is talk of A-Rod being shipped to  If A-Rod is not a  next year, the fans will be happy.
 I think the  will win today. Unlike A-Rod, CC is good under pressure. I hope A-Rod plays, however.
   I don't want to fall asleep in public.
 Robert I'm getting a lot of heat for saying you should dump Kristen- but I'm right. If you saw the Miss Universe girls you would reconsider.
 My  interview with  discussing my  tweets, A-Rod's slump & the presidential debates 
  Thanks!
  Because they are either jealous or losers (or both).
 A reader just sent me the following: "I wanted to share with you something rather startling. On page 103 of (cont) 
 Newsweek ending print edition--sad. Now my Newsweek covers mean nothing--they lost all credibility. TIME to follow?
     Thanks!
  Dopey--who went bankrupt, you? I never did.
  Check the records, dummy--I was never a Bush II fan--he is why we have Obama!
   They only suffered by watching your 3rd rate documentary (which bombed).
  I will--thanks.
 Lots of response to my Pattinson/Kristen Stewart reunion. She will cheat again--100 certain--am I ever wrong?
 Looking forward to honoring the great Dogan family & the success of the Trump Towers project in Istanbul  Annual Gala Dinner
 Alert--US jobless claims up 46,000 to 388,000. Really bad news. 7.8% is now a fraud--not possible!
 Amazing--my tweets are covered across every spectrum from  to  to 
 Obama's spending and borrowing is burying America and destroying our children's future. Does he even care?
 #SuccessByTrump, exclusively available  has set sale records for fastest selling cologne. Makes a great gift 
 Great--now Supreme Court Justices are talking about a constitutional right to a cell phone  Obama, just stop already.
 . Re: Libya--Hillary took the blame for Obama.
 Mitt's proposed tax cuts for the middle class will spur record economic growth.
 Major grudge match this weekend between  &  I have a dilemma, I am good friends w/ both Woody (cont) 
 Under his administration, oil and gas production on public land is down over 10%  Obama did not tell truth last night.
 If Obama goes after Mitt's private sector experience in the next debate then Mitt should ask for Obama's college records--all of them.
 I find it very sad that we have a President with zero private sector experience attacking an opponent for being successful.
 . Bring  back? He is back!
 . should really be ashamed about his massive box office disaster. Take a hint and get out of the film (cont) 
 . If we didn't remove incredibly powerful fire retardant asbestos & replace it with junk that doesn't (cont) 
 What is never said is that people take a big risk with their money and can lose it all. We should be given credit for taking this risk.
 Can you imagine how embarrassing it would have been for the country if the candidates actually did get into a fist fight?
 Robert Pattinson should not take back Kristen Stewart. She cheated on him like a dog & will do it again--just watch. He can do much better!
 Michael Vick of the Philadelphia  is a great athlete but not a great quarterback.
 Initial reports say 2nd debate viewership dropped. See what happens when I am not mentioned.
 Just read about my friend  was set up--too bad he has to use the court system instead of his muscles.
  Bill- You should have named your beautiful son Donald.
 Joe Girardi  must play his starters, even A-Rod, they got you there.
 While the  look like they quit and are finished, they won't quit for CC
 Last Saturday A-Rod was 0-3 and left 6 stranded. But he was still hitting on girls from the dugout  He is very selfish!
 CC is a great pitcher and can handle pressure-- will win tonight. So far my predictions have all been correct.
 George Steinbrenner  would have gotten out of A-Rod's contract three years ago...but put A-Rod in tonight.
 Obama talks about what he is going to do--why the hell didn't he just do it, especially in the first 2 years when he had all votes necessary
 Obama at big debate disadvantage--he just can't get away from his bad record.
 . scored last night on both substance and style.
 ...Bad decisions can be devastating.
 Obama was beaten but not knocked out. He lives to fight another day. But in the real world presidents are not given a second chance...
 All the guys that said  would lose are rapidly coming on board. Mitt will remember the early helpers.
 If Obama keeps pushing wind turbines our country will go down the tubes economically, environmentally & aesthetically.
 Robert Bryce  on your great opinion piece on terrible wind turbines & how destructive they are. Windmills are a disaster.
 Remember, new "environment friendly" lightbulbs can cause cancer. Be careful-- the idiots who came up with this stuff don't care.
 Wind turbines are not only killing millions of birds, they are killing the finances & environment of many countries & communities.
 Great article on wind turbines by Robert Bryce in today's  
 Really enjoyed discussing  yesterday with  I am a long time Yankee fan.
 Via  "Donald Trump would fire A-Rod" 
  Thanks
 My interview with  discussing why A-Rod should be fired from  & how to terminate his contract 
 My twitter followers will soon be over 2 million--& all the "biggies." It's like having your own newspaper.
 My twitter has become so powerful that I can actually make my enemies tell the truth.
 Polls are starting to look really bad for Obama. Looks like he'll have to start a war or major conflict to win. Don't put it past him!
 Obama did much better than he did last time--but still lost decisively.
 Do you believe Barack Hussein Obama (aka Barry Soetoro) looked like a president last night? I don't!
 Obama has zero credibility on oil and coal. If we do not win energy as a country, we just do not win, period!
 I still love Derek, he is a winner!
 Remember, I said Derek don't sell your Trump World Tower apartment...its been lucky for you. The day after he sold it, he broke his foot.
 At the debate, the President kept talking of what he is going to do. I kept saying, why didn't he do it? He lost me a long time ago.
 Verlander pitched great, but  look truly defeated.
 Stupid George Will gave  no chance 3 months ago. Take off his little spectacles and he's just another dummy.
 George Will said "best debate he ever saw". If you ever heard George Will speak(boring) anything is exciting.
 Debate showed--- these guys really hate each other. At one point it looked like they would come to blows. 
 Obama better than last time, but again,  wins. Good night. #debate
 You talk tough, Mr. President, but have done nothing about China killing our jobs and economy.
 Such long rhetorical and boring answers from Obama. No wonder nothing gets done.
 . much better on Libya and Middle East problems. Obama has no answer.
 Obama keeps namedropping Bill Clinton-- he is no Bill Clinton.
 Obama weak on immigration. All words, no action. He's been Prez 4 years.
 Obama is looking rhetorical and weak.  is looking strong and sharp.
 Obama just said  was "a very successful investor"--- big mistake for Obama to admit- he has less and less credibility.
 Obama keeps saying that he will do something--- but why hasn't he done it? It's all talk.
 . looks much stronger and much more Presidential!
 So far  is winning big.
 Then how come gasoline is hitting record high prices?
 Good response on jobs by 
 Why has Obama let China and others take our jobs?
 Why hasn't Obama created jobs?
 Getting ready to watch the debate--- as they say "let's get ready to rumble"!
 I was just told by one of the top  players that my golf courses are the most elite in the country. Very nice compliment--I agree.
 We should be able to negotiate a deal with Iran because they know we could blow them away to the Stone Age.They just don't believe we would.
  It is selling great at Macy's--thanks!
 For political purposes only, Obama is planning to hit Libya for the Benghazi embassy attack right before the election?
 Great win last night by Peyton Manning &  in San Diego coming from 24 points behind on the road. Very impressive.
 If the  can somehow beat Verlander tonight then they can still salvage the series. And I will go to games 6& 7 so they will win!
 Get ready for tonight!
  Olivia--we love you. You are doing a great job.
 . Obama gets wise tonight just ask for his college records & transcripts--he will quiet down quickly.
 Good luck  tonight--have no doubt you will be great.
 Congratulations to  on exposing more Democrat voter fraud.  was caught red handed telling people to vote twice.
 I bet the terrorists in Libya used weapons we supplied them during their so called 'revolution' to attack our embassy in Benghazi.
 . " Five Questions w/  of Leadership is the biggest threat to America'" 
 Between Libya, the national security leaks and Fast & Furious, Obama has had more national security scandals than any other President.
 . is doing a fantastic job for the Republican Party--hope he gets the credit he deserves.
 . I tried watching but fell asleep.
 . wonderful "The Men Who Built America" with me on tonight at 9 -- bad timing, I'll be live tweeting the debate
 Because Obama was so pathetic in the first debate, tonight's audience will be humongous--people want to see if he is for real.
 The Coca Cola company is not happy with me--that's okay, I'll still keep drinking that garbage.
 It's amazing--my weekly scheduled interviews on  and  draw the highest ratings. And they get bigger week by week--thanks folks!
 Had a great time with  last night on the Intrepid. Paul is terrific.
 Obama just had another trillion dollar budget deficit for the fourth year in a row. At least he is consistent.
 All the morons that cause the controversy in Scotland have made my development far more successful than anticipated.
 My #TrumpTuesday  interview discussing the stakes for tonight's debate and the state of my stock portfolio 
 Diet Coke tweet had a monster response--dammit, I wish the stuff worked.
 . Thanks for helping promote & make Trump International Golf Links Scotland so successful--you stupid fool!
 . Your documentary died many deaths. You have, in my opinion, zero talent.
 I can confirm the reports-- my first season winner, will be returning to this All-Star season of 
 . is absolutely right, it will be a nightmare for  if Obama is re-elected.
 Verlander is great but very beatable. Does not have a good ERA in playoff games
 I turned down going to the debate tonight so that I could do live tweets to my many followers.
 I have no doubt that Mitt will do really well tonight. We'll all be watching 
 Lots of pressure on Obama tonight--even more than A-Rod. If he doesn't perform well it could be over.
 I hope A-Rod has a great night for the Yankees--he owes it to them--especially with Derek hurt.
  Happy Birthday!
 Gov. Gary Johnson pulling votes from  waste your vote. Obama must go!
 Based on very popular demand, I will be live tweeting tomorrow night during the Presidential debate.
 Diet Coke, etc is inverse to reason. It tricks your body into eating more.
 The more Diet Coke, Diet Pepsi, etc you drink, the more weight you gain?
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday  7:40 AM Tune in!
 If  has a good debate tomorrow night, Obama is finished!
 Obama is planning on attacking Romney on Bain in tomorrow's debate  Mitt should bring up college applications & records
 Once again Obama fails to classify China as a currency manipulator. He just helped China steal even more jobs and money from us.
 Looking forward to honoring the great Dogan family and the success of the Trump Towers project in Istanbul  Annual Gala Dinner
 A-Rod should donate his contract to charity. He doesn't make the  any money and he doesn't perform. He is a $30M/yr rip off.
 Looking forward to speaking at tonight's gala for  supporters at the Intrepid. Mitt's doing well.
 The  logo is plain and boring--but if they win it won't matter.
 . documentary on my Scottish golf club was so boring and wrong. He is a small-timer with no talent.
 My  interview discussing  performance, the Libya cover up and tomorrow's crucial debate 
 Barack Obama is not who you think he is. Most overrated politician in US history.
 Isn't it time that Obama release his college records and applications? Boy would that create a mess! He is not who you think.
 Wing Whackers: the reality is, wind turbines kill birds ttp://bit.ly/O5IV3O
 I don't get  stumbling, bumbling humor--no better than his failed Marriage Ref tv show
 Lots of response to my comment on Diet Coke- let's face it, it doesn't work- just makes you hungry.
 Lots of response on Derek--but I told him his apartment was lucky! -- We love Derek.
 In case you missed it, my  interview discussing announcing the All Star cast of  
 . Why not everyone else is using it--- it's available at 
   and your parents meant the world to me
 A-Rod was a great player when he lived at Trump Park Avenue--- even though he was on the juice!
  Thanks--a great country
 Derek Jeter had a great career until 3 days ago when he sold his apartment at Trump World Tower- I told him not to sell- karma?
 . Sorry,  is a very smart guy!
 . Your dad was a great man & great leader.
  Thank you
 I love  great people!
 A-Rod is just not making it. We want to give him a chance but it was only drugs that made him great.
 I feel guilty not having attended the last two  games (losses). They would have won!
 Obama will be trying very hard at next debate- he doesn't want to lose the Boeing.
 Who says Obama will do better in the next debate- has he gotten smarter in 2 weeks!
 . poll numbers are looking really good. One more great debate performance and it will be a total knockout. 
 I have never seen a thin person drinking Diet Coke.
 No, I wasn't at the  game yesterday- can't go today either. When I go, they win.
 Brooklyn Nets have the worst uniform ever- Boring- won't matter if they win("Winning solves all problems"- (cont) 
 Yankees can win today. Kuroda is a highly underrated pitcher.
 A-Rod hit ball hard first at bat. Time for him to step up and leave.
 Swisher should have caught ball in right field last night.
 . are in trouble without Derek. Try A-Rod at short- get him some confidence.
 A bad thing finally happened to Derek Jeter--- he is a great champion.
 So much for Washington shutting down Strasburg- they deserved to lose.
 Roadway steel on beautiful Verrazano-Narrows Bridge is rusting and rotting away. Scrape and paint before too late.
 Tonight, despite everything, put A-Rod in the lineup. 
 Everyone's wondering what's wrong with A-Rod. Not one sports writer blames it on his not being able to use drugs anymore-- the real reason. 
 They found Jessica in Colorado--- body was mutilated--- death to the pervert killer.
 Joe Girardi did a great job of managing the Yankees this series.
 I'll bet Obama goes down just like Washington because he doesn't use our(this country's) best people to win.
 Washington should have brought in Strasburg to relieve-- they would have won.
 When Strasburg leaves in a couple of years under free agency Washington will say " what were we doing".
 I told you, whenever I go to a  game the  win.
 When an employee leaves me and begs to come back--I never let them. Loyalty is very important.
 I look forward to Tuesday night's presidential debate--I wonder if Obama will use my name again.
 Very different styles but each totally effective in his own way at the debate.
 Obama's economic policies are causing inflation on hard working families. The price of corn alone has risen over 200% since he was elected.
 With our amazing All Star cast,    &  are also returning as boardroom advisors.
 Great to hear that our loyal  fans are happy with today's announcement of the new cast. This will be something special!
 . looks like he really cleaned up his act.
 I'm going to the  game tonight to root them on--they always win when I am there.
 My Scotland course is receiving accolades from all over the world--a great honor for me.
 Credibility is important to me- hence must admit that both candidates did really well last night. #VPDebate
 Doing the  with  was great- I really like Matt.
 First Minister of Scotland released bomber of Pan Am flight #103 on "compassionate grounds." Do you believe?
   Great to have you back for the best season yet!
 ObamaCare is a complete disaster. Many of my friends have to scale down their businesses because they can't afford it. Terrible.
 British PM Cameron is making a fool of himself by wasting billions of pounds on unwanted & environment destroying Scottish windmills.
 Going over to  now to introduce  cast etc.-- watch.
 Pretty even debate- no knockouts. However Ryan's closing statement somewhat stronger. What do you think? #VPDebate
 Biden's statements on Medicare are very effective. Ryan must now come back and combat. #VPDebate
 Excellent story on  very good moment for Ryan. #VPDebate
 Pretty even debate but don't force Obama into a war--- he would be the wrong leader. #VPDebate
 Biden's sarcastic smiling may or may not be effective depending on who is watching. #VPDebate
 Hard for Biden to justify Libya mess but doing best he can. #VPDebate
 Both candidates are looking sharp- now it's up to the mouth and the mind. #VPDebate
 Get ready- this should be informative and fun! #VPDebate
 Looking forward to the debate tonight and will be tweeting live with very honest assessment.
 . is an elite businesswoman who will bring a great outlook to DC. Support her campaign here 
 If Obama's poll numbers continue to fall, I expect him to launch a military strike somewhere before the final debate.
 Another sign that  is right. New government labor report casts even more doubt on the September jobs data 
 Why does Barack Obama's ring have an arabic inscription?  Who is this guy?
 It's Thursday and only 26 days until the election. How many illegal donations from China and Saudi Arabia did Obama collect today?
 So Obama used to tell classmates that he was Kenyan royalty and an Indonesian prince  Sounds like his book bio!
 Our foreign policy decisions are dumbest in U.S. history
 Live tweeting during tonight's VP debate...should be a great time
 How the hell does the Libyan government get off telling our embassy security they can't have loaded guns for protection?!
 Why the hell did we help the Libyan "rebels" in the first place. That is the real scandal.
 Outright disgusting--the Obama administration has continually stonewalled and lied to US Amb. Sean Smith's mother 
 I suspect  could do well tonight. Don't be fooled by his gaffes. He is a seasoned and feisty debater.
 If  is dating  again then she has a death wish. A beater is always a beater--just watch!
 Amazing that Derek Jeter played with an injury throughout most of last night's  game and did so well.
 $30M a year and A-Rod is now relegated to the bench.  would have lost if Girardi hadn't benched him in the 9th (see my prediction)
 I guess they have Lance Armstrong cold. Brutal report. A waste of taxpayer money to take down an American hero.
 . cast will be announced tomorrow at 7:30am ET on the  with 
 Staff at Trump Park Avenue disliked A-Rod--to put it "mildly" -- The staff at Trump World Tower loves Derek Jeter.
 Asking why my dislike of A-Rod--dishonorable dealings with me on an apartment deal
 Great move to take A-Rod out of game. Now terminate his contract based on misrepresentation (drugs).
 Raul Ibanez did something never done in baseball history. Amazing move by manager Joe G.
 After Obama's '07 racist speech on Katrina relief, he now won't provide any aid to victms of Hurricane Isaac 
 USA Today has the worst "new" newspaper logo in the business--go back to the original!
 Traveling to LA this winter? Book a round at Trump Nat'l Golf Club  Rated best course on the West Coast (& best food)
  Thank you
 Must read article on Obama's illegal fundraising from abroad  Foreign candidate getting foreign donations.
 I enjoy meeting tourists in #TrumpTower. People travel from across the world to see the five-level Atrium & waterfall.
 Congratulations to  on getting an "A" grade from  on his fiscal policy. Rick is a fantastic governor.
 Even with lower profit projections, American firms are still throwing money into China  Obama is killing investment.
 I am more concerned about Biden in the debate than I am about Obama. Be careful on Thursday night!
 Consumer spending fell in September  Another indicator the 7.8% unemployment number is cooked.
 A-Rod must be dropped in the Yankees line-up tonight if they want to win. He simply can't perform without drugs.
 Obama was guest at VP debate moderator Martha Raddatz's wedding  Do people think this is fair?
 Receiving thousands of thank you letters from  students for my convocation speech. The honor was all mine! Great people.
 DELUSIONAL--Obama actually thought that he won the debate  What is he thinking?
 47M on food stamps. Over 23M Americans unemployed. 50% of college grads unemployed. And Obama wants us talking about Big Bird.
 Has Barack Obama been caught red handed laundering money into his campaign from illegal online foreign donations? Media?
 I just had to fire someone, he didn't have a clue--he reminded me of Obama on Wednesday night.
 27 days until America's greatest test since our founding. In this election, we decide whether we become great again.
 Obama is under a great of pressure to perform well in the next debate. Let's see how he reacts under pressure.
 Remember, Obama limped across the finish line--he should have lost to Hillary. Be careful!
 I don't think Obama will do well in the second debate--he is psyched out just like A-Rod.
 How can British PM Cameron spend so much money on Scottish windmills which are ruining the countryside?
 By popular request I will also be tweeting live during the Vice Presidential debate Thursday night. It will be very interesting, I promise.
 .  fully apologized last night for calling me a racist. Thank you David--we are again friends.
 The public is about to learn a lot more information on Barack Obama and his true background in the coming weeks…
 Now that Obama’s poll numbers are in tailspin – watch for him to launch a strike in Libya or Iran. He is desperate.
 Mitt’s subsequent rise in the polls post-debate shows that the American public can still spot a real winner.
 “In order to build your wealth and improve your business smarts, you need to know about real estate.” - Think Like a Billionaire
 With these record high gas prices, what does it say about Obama that he was trying to brag about his energy policy in the debate?
 Looking forward to live tweeting during the rest of the debates. Will be a lot of fun.
 When will the unemployment numbers be corrected? Sadly, after the election!
 George Will is a political moron. Last month he said Romney couldn't win.
 In the end, Andy Pettitte did not rat out his friend Roger Clemens. I like him again, a lot.
 Drop A-Rod in the order and cut his salary based on unreported drug use. Also, not a pressure player.
 My  #TRUMPTUESDAY interview discussing the upcoming debates, the real state of unemployment & bias media 
 Why isn't Obama protecting us from ridiculous gas prices?
 California gas prices going thru the roof, others to follow. An election-losing event for Obama.
 Greece should get out of the euro & go back to their own currency--they are just wasting time.
 . Shout out = work hard!
 . is playing great for St. Louis Cardinals. They made a wise decision.
 . is correct--these reporters would not have been so brave while Jack was running GE.
 Our many loyal viewers should expect a major announcement very soon on next season's  Our fans will be pleased.
 Sleepy eyes  -- whenever you mention me unfairly I will likewise mention you.
 Obama projected a 2012 budget deficit of $557B. It is actually double that at $1.1T  We can't afford four more years.
 Welcome to Obama's recovery - government workers' unemployment rate has fallen to 4.3%.  We need private sector growth.
 China is taking the oil in Libya while our embassy is being attacked after we won the war for the rebels. Obama's policies suck!
 Obama's planned tax hike will hit over 1 million small businesses  Expect more massive unemployment and stagnant growth
  Work hard, love what you do, keep focused, never lose your momentum.
 How long did it take for Obama to call Hugo Chavez and congratulate him on his 'reelection?' Who do you think Chavez supports in ours?
 Congratulations to  on setting the  record with 48 consecutive games with a TD pass. He is a great guy and player.
 At the request of many- I will be doing live tweets during the next presidential debate.
 Great win last night for the  in Baltimore.
 Sleepy eyes  is an absolute joke of a reporter. He is in the bag for Obama. He can't carry  jock.
 Who is more believable on the state of employment--the great  or some government bureaucrat who is voting for Obama?
 It's great that sleepy eyes  gets no traction.
 A record 46.68M Americans are now on food stamps  Four more years?
 I would do same thing if I were China. They want Obama. 
 I told Alex Salmond that he should never have released al-Megrahi when he foolishly asked me for support!
 If Alex Salmond had not stupidly released terrorist al-Megrahi (PanAm flight 103) to his friends, there would be no Trump wind farm dispute.
 My  interview discussing Obama's failed and dangerous foreign policy and the real unemployment numbers 
 . (news radio) has too many commercials--can't listen.
 UK has no money & yet they subsidize ugly Scottish wind farms--big outcry.
 I'm doing  today at 11 am--always interesting!
 Got to do something about these missing chidlren grabbed by the perverts. Too many incidents--fast trial, death penalty.
 Just got back from Scotland and speech in London. Amazing "packed house" crowd.
 More than 70M people watched the Presidential Debate. A new record. See what happens when I am so prominently mentioned (just kidding)!
 Looking forward to Sunday’s speech in the ExCel Centre. 
 “The team with the best players wins.” -- 
 . #CPACCO kept up the momentum from the debate.  even made a surprise appearance. Now go win CO!
 Now America knows--the Emperor has no clothes. Why would Obama do better in a 2nd debate? #Debate #Obama
 My friend  called it-- recast the race.
 Glad to hear that  is doing well. She is a terrific person.
 I promise to do a new #trumpvlog when I get back next week---- lots of requests. Thanks!
 Scary & Unsustainable: On Monday the US added more debt than from 1776 through Pearl Harbor 
 Bill Clinton has been Obama's most effective surrogate out on the trail.
 Congrats to  on finishing 1st in the AL East. Derek Jeter is great--good luck in the playoffs!
 I'll be in London on Sunday at the ExCel Centre to talk about success. It will be a great time for everyone! 
  Amazing is good too.
   Most likely in February.
 The upcoming season of  will be terrific--a great cast.
 Now another Obama speech from 2002 with him talking about taking the rich's 'stuff'  Who is this guy? Where's the media?
 Congratulations to Michelle and Barack Obama on their 20th anniversary.
 Happy to have just passed 1.5M followers on twitter. We picked up over 14,000 yesterday alone. It's great to speak to everyone daily.
 I'm eagerly awaiting the next polls. The debate performance could be devastating to the Obama team. Let's see what happens.
   Will be a great event. See you in London.
 Both being optimistic and remembering the big picture have served me well throughout my life. You need to stay positive.
 . will be a great Oscar host. He did an amazing job at my  roast.
  Thank you.
 Wind farms are ugly, not cost effective and don't produce worthwhile returns or energy. No wonder governments are giving up on them.
 As a big job creator, I was greatly honored to have been mentioned twice tonight during the debate.
 Congratulations to Mitt Romney. He was not only good, he was absolutely fantastic tonight!
 There's only one candidate who cut medicare and that's Barack Obama. Cut over $700M to move into ObamaCare.
 In August, 2012, Obama said the so called Arab Spring sprung from 'joyful longing for human freedom'  Good call!
 Have you heard? China just told Obama to jump. Obama asked how high.
  I agree
 Obama's '07 speech which  just released not only shows that Obama is a racist but also how the press always covers for him.
 I'm always amazed when I travel to my foreign properties.Seeing the Trump brand across 4 continents proves that excellence can be universal.
  Thank you.
  Thank you
  Yes, absolutely.
  Work hard and never give up!
 I will be visiting Trump Int'l Golf Links in Scotland tomorrow. Always great to see the Great Dunes of Scotland. 
 Who is rooting for Obama more tonight--his campaign advisors or the press?
 Can't wait for tonight's debate--actually delayed my trip to Europe so I can watch. This is going to be a great night.
 My  interview discussing  debate responses, Obama's hidden records, my tweets and unemployment 
 I am very proud of Ivanka!
 My daughter Ivanka is being honored by the Wharton School of Finance with the 2012 Young Leadership Award. Also (cont) 
  See you in London--big crowd!
 Reverend Wright must have great hatred for Obama and the manner in which he was shunted aside.
 Obama called Reverend Wright his friend, counselor & great leader--then dumped him like a dog!
 See June 2007 speech--is Obama a total racist?
 Heading to London on Sunday to make a speech at ExCel Centre.  A sell out and looking forward to a great time.
  Thanks Mike
  You are right, Carrara is a great marble.
 Congratulations to Barack Obama for having 2012's debt already surpass 2011 
 The cheap 12 inch sq. marble tiles behind speaker at UN always bothered me. I will replace with beautiful large marble slabs if they ask me.
 Where is the main stream media reporting on Univision's new expose of Fast and Furious? Too busy looking at Mitt's taxes?
 Major Mexican cartel boss El Diego was just arrested with weapons provided to him through Fast and Furious  Media??
 A great article about how ObamaCare has even further complicated the tax code and will hurt housing market 
 . Wishing your wife a Happy Birthday
 It's Tuesday, how much will the media continue to cover up the embassy attacks for Obama?
 I'll be on  tonight on  at 10 pm.
 Great to hear that  legend and hall of famer John Elway has endorsed  in Colorado. CO is a must win state for Mitt.
 Under Obama, Iran has taken over Iraq, Al Qaeda has taken over Libya, the Muslim Brotherhood now controls Egypt. Worst foreign policy ever.
 Woody Johnson's comments that he would rather have  win the election than his  win games shows real patriotism.
 The Chinese are now hacking White House computers. Why not? They already own the place.
 Big win by  last night to take control of AL East. Jeter & company now control their destiny.
 Wednesday's debate is day one of the election. Over 70 million voters will be watching.
 In Nov. '11, Al Qaeda's flag flew over the 'birthplace' of Libya's revolution  In Sept. '12 it flew over our Embassy.
 Glad to hear  will be hosting this year's Oscars. Something new that should be fun.
 A clip from  where I take  audience on the Katie Coach 
 My  #TrumpTuesday interview discussing how  can win the first debate & the last 35 days 
 If Obama mentions Mitt's tax returns in tomorrow's debate then Mitt should immediately ask for Obama's college records & applications
 Obama is trying to block sequester layoff notices in Virginia  Another example of sleazy politics!
 Threatening phone calls from Obama supporters are being made to the Michigan GOP office  Don't be intimidated!
 Obama loves wasting our money. He just made another guarantee of $197M to a solar company  Cronyism!
 Al Qaeda taking over Libya after we made it possible--really amazing.
 Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez said in a television interview that aired on Sunday "If I were American, I'd vote for Obama."
 Big cancer risk from new "environmental" light bulbs"--a big price to pay!
 Obama now wants to give another $450M to the Muslim Brotherhood. Money we don't have going to people that hate us. Moronic.
 How many more of our soldiers have to be shot by the Afghanis they are training? Let's get the hell out of there and focus on U.S.
 Thanks for all the great comments on Facebook! 
 #TrumpTower is one of the country's top tourist destinations.
 If you live in Colorado, make sure to go to  #CPACCO in Denver on Oct. 4. Colorado is a must win state for Mitt!
 Bad news -- Chief Justice Roberts is back to deliver more BS  Roberts saved ObamaCare--very disloyal
 Obama deserves much less credit for the killing of Bin Laden. The praise goes to our brave military and intelligence officers.
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday  7:30 AM
 Lots of people agree that the Emmys were a joke--got bad ratings--no credibility!
 . Thanks (I think)
 . Great Markos!
 Thank you Chicago Tribune--highest four star rating for Trump Int'l Hotel & Tower restaurant "Sixteen" 
 Republicans and  must get tough very soon.
 Only 36 days until the election.  needs to stay on offense. Make Obama's terrible record the issue. #TimeToGetTough
 In debate,  should ask Obama why autobiography states "born in Kenya, raised in Indonesia."
 Read editorial in today's  by  -- "A New Course for the Middle East" 
 Another clip from my hour long  interview discussing how Obama does not support Israel 
 My  interview discussing how Romney can win the election 
 Another great  this past weekend. One of the best sporting events of the year!
 Make sure to catch my appearance today on  at 3 pm.  filmed the episode from her home.
 My  interview discussing the lies behind Benghazi-gate & Obama not deserving credit for killing UBL 
 Cyberattack on White House--- what's next? 
 I will be on the  today at 3 PM ET
 DonnaMarie's book, Hidden Mirrors, is excellent reading. 
 At the National Achievers Congress in London, I will be talking about success. It will be an amazing event. 
 Obama lied to the public about the Al Qaeda attack on our consulate in Libya. He should be held accountable.
  It works.
 American incomes have fallen $3,040 per household in the last 38 months 
 If you live in a state with early voting, you should be voting as soon as possible. Bring your friends and family with you.
 Sean's interview with Bob Woodward on  was very interesting--Woodward was great. 
 .  delivered an excellent speech yesterday at the UN. Too bad  wasn't there.
  You have to love what you do and keep your focus at all times.
 Brits spent $57.8M on the royal family. Obamas cost us $1.4B in expenses--including entertainment  Living large on us.
 It's amazing how different all of the polling results are--not an exact science.
 My successful acquisition of the Kluge estate was a fantastic deal which is already being studied in business schools.
  Wishing you good luck and a happy birthday.
 The  is currently going on--and is one of the truly great sporting events.
 Obama is not working. US Manufacturing orders fell a record 13.9% in August. Where's the recovery? 
 Watch this video for a look at our great course in Los Angeles--- Rancho Palos Verdes--  
 . You are terrific (always). Great job on the Apprentice.
 Be tenacious. Being tenacious means you're tough and patient at once, so it's a formidable combination.
 Keep the big picture in mind. There are always opportunities & possibilities, & thinking too small can negate a lot of them.
 Iraq was one of our biggest mistakes. We got absolutely nothing for our sacrifices.The country will collapse (cont) 
 Are you a young professional getting ready for a big meeting? Pick up a #Trump suit   Look your best!
  Go for the gold standard--aim high. Be tenacious and have passion for your work.
 Someone must be fired at  for that stupid deal they made buying Huffington Post.
 . must ask for Obama's college records & applications--why is he not doing this?
 China's Financial Institutions are expanding overseas.  They will own everything if we don't stop them now.
 ObamaCare is a failure. Costs are rising much faster under Obama than other Presidents.
 Now Obama's campaign is guaranteeing 12 million new jobs during a 2nd term  More like $12T in new debt if he wins.
 A resort in Arizona is using sewage to make snow. Environmentalists are going crazy--I won't be skiing in that snow.
 I have fun, I love what I do. You should too. Find out how at the National Achievers Conference this October in London 
 I hope the  is ready for a Third Party if they blow this election because that is what they will face. They must fight hard.
 Does Madonna know something we all don't about Barack? At a concert she said "we have a black Muslim in the White House."
 If only the morons  were as concerned with Obama's inconsistent statements on the Embassy attacks as they are (cont) 
 The full video of my  speech  Liberty's largest ever Convocation crowd.
 How long will it take for chants-- "bring back the replacement refs" -- when a bad call is made?
 Congratulations to my friend David Wright of the  who is now their all-time hitting leader.
 40 days until the election. Crunch time.  must stay on offense and take the fight to Obama.
  I agree!
   Thank you.
 . did an amazing job raising money for  with his  event featuring  Watch 
 Anthony Baxter's 'You've been Trumped' was a complete box office bomb & joke. Trump Int'l in Scotland is a resounding success. I won!
 Today I will be visiting #Trump Int'tl Hotel & Tower  Chicago's tallest & most exclusive residentail & hotel property.
  Good luck and never give up.
  Experience and instinct work well together.
  Thank you.
 Just bought the Kluge Estate in Charlottesville, Virginia (don't worry, only business). See Washington Post article 
 Jerry Falwell, Jr. stated speech was best in University's history...my great honor.
 Liberty University speech by DJT was biggest by far in school's history. Standing ovations...great young people!
 Associated Press knowingly and inaccurately wrote about Liberty University speech. Shameful reporting...no credibility.
 Huff post gets it wrong re: Ferry Point...the only leakage of gas is from Arianna Huffington.
 No matter how good the replacement refs do, they will be soundly criticized--they can't win!
 China has done very well under Obama. Now they just released their first aircraft carrier.
 China is filling the vacuum left by Obama at the UN on the world stage.
 Must read column for all young people: "Obama's war on young voters who elected him" 
  We have raised millions of dollars for charity.
   Thanks and good luck.
   Thank you
   
 A clip of my  speech talking about the importance of the election & our country's potential  via
 Housing prices will be going up big league--a great time to buy--good luck!
 Pres. O -- a "bump in the road" in reference to our Ambassador's (and others) killing in Libya
 Hope & Change--the number of 26 year olds living with parents has jumped 46% under Obama  Four more years?
 . Piers did a great job--the interview was very important.
 Aspirin gets the best press of almost anything I can think of---fact or great PR?
 Obama's complaints about Republicans stopping his agenda are BS since he had full control for two years. He can never take responsibility.
 Obama's new excuse for his failures is that you "can't change Washington from the inside." Not what he said in '09. 
 . Love what you do and work hard.
 Andy Williams has died. He was a friend of mine and a great guy.
 English taxpayers should stop subsidizing the destruction of Scotland by paying massive subsidies for ugly wind turbines.
  Thanks!
   Richard is terrific.
  It was my pleasure and thank you.
 The number of unemployed Americans has increased over 60% during Obama's term. The economy can't survive another 4 years.
 ...One point I made sure to stress at  is to be sure to get even with anyone who crosses you...
 ...Never let yourself be pushed around--but treat the good folks great.
 Read about my  speech in   Morning Score 
 The 18th hole at the Blue Monster  in Miami is considered the toughest finishing hole in golf... 
 Obama will be going on  & fundraising while in NYC for the UN Assembly...
 ...yet not one meeting with an ally (or an enemy!) Where's the media?
 ...well into our 4th week of shooting the record 13th season of  The 'All Stars' are hard at work...
 Did a shoot in front of the Metropolitian Museum on 5th Ave for the 13th season of the Apprentice...
 The replacement refs are getting blamed for everything. I've seen many bad sports calls over the years.
 One 57 is one of the worst looking buildings I've seen in a long time, in particular its very ugly "skin."
 Thousands of great people showed up from Liberty University yesterday. I love standing ovations! 
 My  #TrumpTuesday interview discussing how  has to get tough, real unemployment & bias press 
 Emmys telecast is way down & lowest telecast on record among young adults. Emmys have no credibility-Should have nominated Apprentice again!
  Late winter or early spring. It will be a great season!
  Not a bad idea!
  I am sure you would be just fine!
  Thanks!
 The Obama Economy--workers added to disability and individuals added to food stamps more than doubles net jobs created 
 Muslim Brotherhood head of Egypt Morsi is already making demands on Obama before the WH visit. Obama's foreign policy is a complete failure.
 Coincidence? Obama and Ahmadinejad each describe  warning over the Iranian nuclear program as just 'noise' 
 Home values have sunk a record 15% under Obama.
 The debates are going to have a big impact on the election.  has proved--in Florida--he delivers under pressure.
 Secure your place at the National Achievers Congress in London. It will be an amazing event with a great surprise. 
 Living in denial--only 15% of Democrats think that recent economic news is poor 
 Scary--Obama's budget deficits are so out of control that he has to borrow 40 cents on every dollar he spends.
 . daughter of  has written a very informative book, "Our Constitution Rocks!"  Age 8 & up
 Today I spoke  Convocation, a great crowd... 
 Congratulations to Brandt Snedeker on his $11.4M payday on Sunday by winning the Tour Championship and FedEX Cup. Well done.
 With Obama and Bernanke destroying the value of the dollar, gold and real estate should continue to rise in value.
 The attack on our Libyan consulate was the worst attack on the US since 9/11. Time for Obama to come clean.
 Despite all of China's cheating, they are not doing that well--we can beat them--our country has great potential!
 All these polls released by news outlets are oversampling Democrats. They want to influence public perception of the race.
 The Emmys are all politics, that's why, despite nominations, The Apprentice never won--even though it should have many times over.
 Despite the Emmy's being terrible as a show,  was excellent--and I think his late night show will be a hit.
 The Emmys were horrendous...the absolute worst show!
 My  interview "This much I know" discussing business, Prince Harry, Barack Obama and religion 
 My  interview discussing visiting  Obama's failed foreign policy and the 2012 election 
   It was an honor for me. Thank you.
 With all of the bad economic numbers and horrendous foreign policy, Obama should be down by 12 points--and he's not.
 Will be doing #TrumpTuesday on  earlier tomorrow (7 AM) as I start shooting  Joe, Becky & Andrew = a great team.
 Reverend  has to be really angry. They threw him aside like he was nothing.
 The Republican Party must spend its money wisely and do incredible television commercials. They must be tough and smart.
 Why did  give his tax returns without demanding that Obama release his college records & applications in return?
 Just left Liberty University. Chancellor Jerry Falwell Jr.& his father have done an amazing job...great school & the students were fantastic
 The Ryder Cup will be amazing this week.
  Thank you--I had a great time.
 A letter written to one of my many critics! 
 A letter from an amazing woman 
  It's real.
 I'll be on  Monday at 7:30 AM. Tune in!
 No matter how diligent you are in evaluating a business deal there is invariably one factor you have no control over--luck...
 ...but interestingly, the same people seem to be lucky.
 Rising premium costs from Obamacare will cost businesses billions  Guess where these new costs get passed to – you.
 I have fun, I love what I do. You should too. Find out how at the National Achievers Conference this October. 
 At the Univision forum Obama continued to make excuses for Fast and Furious  His operation killed innocent Americans.
  A happy and healthy family.
 Watch--yesterday Obama continued to evade questions on his security failures in the Benghazi consulate attack. 
 I really like Chelsea Clinton--an amazing young woman. She got the best of both parents. ( agrees)
 . 
  
 Obama's Def. Sec. just said US Asia focus 'not aimed to contain China'  China is hoping that Obama is re-elected.
 It is now clear that the Embassy attack in Libya was a coordinated Al Qaeda operation and not based on some video.
   Not a bad idea.( I'm in a magnanimous mood.)
  Thanks, and we will keep you posted.
  Nice to hear--and good luck!
 Now every time Islamic militants attack they will use that movie as an excuse  What was the excuse before the movie?
   http://someotherlink.com/
 Yesterday I was in Washington, D.C. visiting the #TRUMP Old Post Office renovation. It will be magnificent.
 Interesting article by   Is Time to Use ‘The Trump Card’”  Thanks Matt for the nice mention
 My  interview with  explaining why Mitt should not apologize 
 Great article by Chris Ruddy  " and Jackie's Example" 
 To be successful, never give up. My secrets to success will be shared at the National Achievers Congress in London. 
 Congratulations to Obama. His presidency has had more than 8% unemployment for a record 43 consecutive months  Amazing!
 Isn’t it great that Obama had time yesterday to fundraise with Jay Z and do  while there is a record 21% real unemployment!
 QE3, a political favor for Obama, will cause record inflation on food and fuel. This hits low income families the hardest. Big mistake.
 Have you seen the new #Trump fall collection exclusively available  Top selling brand nationwide.Ties, shirts, fragrance-great gifts.
 Via  "Romney Said Nothing Wrong" 
 ...come down hard--tax the hell out of their imports and reduce our deficit fast.
 China has been unfairly subsidizing the export of cars & auto parts. I've been saying this for 3 years...
 Don't let them build a wind turbine in your backyard (or near your house). It will destroy your property value.
 Via  "The Donald's video should have trumped Eastwood" by  
 My  interview 
 Oil would be $25 a barrel if our government would let us drill. Our country would be rich again--who needs OPEC.
 Technology has shown we have tremendous energy resources right under our feet that we didn't know about 5 years ago.
 The stage is set for the real debate--it will be very interesting!
 Obama should play golf with Republicans & opponents rather than his small group of friends. That way maybe the terrible gridlock would end.
   Dopey--I have never filed for bankruptcy (as you know!)
    Tune in!
  It will be fantastic!
 Filming for  Season 13 is now into the 2nd week. The 'All-Star' cast is already hard at work.
 Obama killed over 100k jobs by not approving Keystone XL pipeline and Canada is now selling the oil to China--very dumb!
 I'll be on  tonight at 10 PM Fox News
 Our soldiers can't even have any more joint exercises with Afghan soldiers because they are getting shot in the (cont) 
 Can you believe--they are blaming  for Egypt.
 . I don't know a lot about failures. And as you know, I never went bankrupt.
 . Industrial turbines are destroying our land.
 . Not a fortune!
 Liberal press won't look into why Obama ignored security warnings for embassies but is obsessed with Romney's private comments.
 None of Romney's leaked comments change the fact that Obama is a complete disaster. 20% real unemployment and $6T in deficit spending.
 It's Tuesday. How many more non-stories will the liberal media try to manufacture so everyone ignores Obama's record?
 The majority of Americans agree with  comments on  and Iran.
 With 49 days until the election,  needs to stay on offense. He should not be apologizing. Deflect onto Obama's record.
 This morning   played some of the  video I filmed for the Tampa Convention 
 My   interview discussing my  video & why  should not apologize 
 My  #TrumpTuesday interview discussing QE3,  leaked comments, Middle East & US oil capability 
  They had both interest and aptitude. They've done a terrific job.
 Now a small country like Sudan tells Obama he can't send any more Marines  We are a laughing stock.
  I never went bankrupt. Enemies love to say I did. Didn't happen.
 At the National Achievers Congress in London this October, I'm going to talk about success and how to avoid failure 
 I'll be at Liberty University Monday, 10 AM, for speech. Looking forward to meeting students--all sold out!
 China is now attacking Japan's economy for leverage  Soon they will try the same with us. #TimeToGetTough
  Definitely could be better.
   Good choice
   Good point!
 It's Monday, how many more excuses will Obama make today about the economy?
 How bad is the new  logo??
 While Obama is denying it, he did receive intelligence about the attacks 3 days before  Too busy campaigning?
 Still a buyer's market. Buy directly from a bank. They want to offload properties that have defaulted, will give good prices & financing.
 Eli Manning staged a great comeback in 4th quarter--an elite quarterback.
 With 50 days until the election, it is #TimeToGetTough for  & 
  So you can see what I mean.
 Teachers in Chicago should go back to work immediately.Rahm Emanuel has offered them a fair deal. Now they're just acting for the cameras.
 Gas prices have doubled under Obama. Over $5/gallon now in California. We must start drilling from our own resources to become independent.
  Never went bankrupt.
 Ugly wind turbines have destroyed the entrance to Palm Springs, CA. These monstrosities are ruining landscapes (cont) 
  Thank you, and happy to hear you enjoyed our Colt's Neck course, it's a beauty.
 Obama is our unlucky President. Everything he touches turns into a mess. Some people just don't have it!
  Thanks, but I have a lot of businesses to run which includes creating jobs.
  True, not much gets done that way.
  Creating jobs for one thing.
  No bankruptcy.
   I never filed for bankruptcy--not even close. However, my enemies love to say I did.
   Good response.
  I never went bankrupt or even close. Enemies love to say I did. DJT
   Great statement.
 Via  "Donald Trump tweets Obama is 'an incompetent President'" 
 My  interview discussing Kate Middleton, cutting foreign aid to Egypt, biased media & unlucky Obama 
 After being ripped off for years, Obama finally figured out that China is taking advantage of us. He's finally listening to me.
 Who wouldn't take Kate's picture and make lots of money if she does the nude sunbathing thing. Come on Kate!
 Kate Middleton is great--but she shouldn't be sunbathing in the nude--only herself to blame.
 Occupy Wall Street is at it again- go out and get a job. It's actually easier work and far more rewarding.
  Thank you. He's doing a great job.
 Barack Obama is an unlucky president--unlucky for our country. Foreign policy is a disaster, economy is terrible--what's next?
 Weekly jobless claims are up once again. The economy cannot recover with Obama in office.
 Hey  hear you are undecided in the election. I can explain why you should vote for 
 If you want to know how to prevail through tough circumstances then read "The Art of the Comeback."
 First Obama says Egypt is not an ally. Then he promises to keep handing over aid  Incompetent and unqualified.
 No surprise--Obama's Deputy Campaign Manager tweeted link from Chinese propaganda outlet  Did she also write it?
 QE3 is going to further sink the dollar into oblivion. Creates artificial numbers for short term market gains. (cont) 
  This is our 13th season. No precise date yet but most likely in the early spring. Shooting is underway. Will be terrific.
  Jody--Agreed.
 Why doesn't Obama let our marines who are guarding the embassies in Egypt have live ammunition? They need it fast.
 It's amazing-- has completely lost all connections to reality. He is a complete shill for Obama.
  Thanks Scott. I appreciate your nice words.
  Josh--Thanks, I think you're right.
   Sometimes that's necessary.
 Amazing--playing with an ankle injury,  Captain Derek Jeter tied Willie Mays last night for #10 on (cont) 
 Via  "Donald Trump Calls Barack Obama 'Incompetent'" 
 My  interview discussing QE3, the housing market, my stock picks and the 2012 election 
 Oh no, another rapper doing a Trump song --"Young Jeezy - Trump Lyrics." Why aren't these guys paying me?
   That could be. Agreed.
  Sam, you're 100% correct. Frankly I wish they'd scram.
 I hate  redesign--the logo is terrible. Lightweight Al Neuharth must've had something to do with this No wonder paper is failing.
 WOW! I just heard that the previously unknown singer Mac Miller has received over 67 million hits on his song "Donald Trump."
 Must see video--Obama's criticism of  is identical to Carter's on Reagan 
 I keep getting great feedback on new #TRUMP cologne 'Success.' Exclusively available at   And best shirts & ties
 Congratulations to Obama and the  The federal deficit has topped $1T for a fourth year in a row  Nice work!
 Welcome to Obama's America--record high poverty and an 8% drop in median household family income  Four more years?
 . should continue to stay on offense on the embassy issue. Obama, who put these radicals in power, deserves blame.
 Obama's convention bounce is gone.  has retaken the lead in the latest  
 It's Thursday, how many more bias press reports will be released against 
 Why are we still giving billions of dollars we don't have in foreign aid to the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt?
 I will be speaking Monday, September 24, (10 A.M.) at Liberty University, to a record setting student body. I look forward to it!
 The media is pathetic. Our embassies are savaged by radicals while Obama does nothing and all they can do is criticize 
 What a coincidence that Obama's good friends in Libya and Egypt picked 9/11 to attack our embassies.
 With allies like Egypt and Libya, who needs enemies?!
 Shouldn't there have been increased security at our embassies on the anniversary of 9/11?
 Obama told  that Egypt is no longer an ally. They used to be until he pushed out Mubarak.
 Filming of the record 13th season of  has started. Be sure to be on the lookout for future updates.
 Wake Up America! See article: "Israeli Science: Obama Birth Certificate is a Fake" 
 If Obama was smart, he would cancel the Muslim Brotherhood's WH visit later this month. He won't.
 Romney’s campaign is being put on the defensive. He cannot let this happen. Stop pandering. Must get tougher (cont) 
 With the high prices of corn to continue expect even more inflation on the price of food.
 Obama's foreign policy is a complete and total disaster--the worst President we have ever had.
 We threw our ally Mubarak overboard and Egypt is now our enemy. Great going Obama--Israel is in trouble.
 This is all about American weakness and an incompetent President.
 We helped Libya & they killed our Ambassador & other Americans. I told you then we made a mistake in backing the (cont) 
 Weakness, cow towing and not standing firm is provocative. We are getting pushed around and robbed under this President.
 Our $16T national debt is now bigger than our $15T GDP. If Obama is re-elected watch for an economic meltdown in 2013.
 Deja vu - I can remember a time when our embassies were stormed under another failed President. Obama=Carter.
 I guess Obama's Cairo Speech really worked out. The Muslim Brotherhood stormed our embassy on 9.11. Imagine if Obama speaks in Beijing?
 No surprise.  displayed Russian ships in tribute to vets  Did they mean to honor the Russians?
 Obama will go down as the worst President in history on many topics but especially foreign policy.
 So Obama can host the Muslim Brotherhood Pres. Morsi in the White House  but doesn't have time for 
 OPEC will use yesterday's attacks on our embassies to raise the price of gas. They are always ripping us off.
 It's Wednesday, how many more of our embassies will be stormed by Islamists?
 What did we get for fighting in Libya besides a dead Ambassador. Demand their oil.
 As bad as they were, I don't remember our embassies being attacked when Mubarak and Gaddafi were in power.
 The Middle East is blowing up--we didn't back Egypt and now they riot against us. Iran is using Iraqi airspace, (cont) 
 Obama is a disaster at foreign policy. Never had the experience or knowledge. He is not capable of doing the job.
 Libya is selling its oil to China--I notice the Chinese Ambassador is very safe.
 I always said the people we fought for in Libya were bad news. Once again, I was right.
 Obama doesn't know what he's doing. His foreign policy is a disaster. Libya, Egypt, Iraq, Afghanistan--all (cont) 
 An attack on our Embassy is an attack on our soil. We have been attacked by Libya. Go into Libya & take the (cont) 
 We fight to free Libya and they kill our Ambassador and other Americans. Obama's foreign policy is a joke.
 When will Obama next go on vacation if he wins the election? The day after.
 Why is the Pentagon wasting precious dollars on going 'green.' Complete waste. We need the best & easiest fuel for our military.
 I hope the  realizes that if they blow this election the Tea Party won't be with them next time.
 Amazing.  has started filming our record 13th season this week thanks to our big and very loyal fan base.
 Priorities--while fundraising and campaigning on our dime, Obama has skipped over 50% of his intel briefings 
 China is an international pariah. They are now harassing Japan over its purchase of 3 uninhabited islands 
 Why won't Obama release his college applications? Is there something 'foreign' about them?
 84% of US troops wounded & 70% of our brave men & women killed in Afghanistan have all come under Obama. Time to get out of there.
 Whatever happened to Obama's 'independent investigation' into national security leaks from his administration? Where's the media?
 The onus of the Chicago teachers' strike falls squarely on the teachers & their union. Inexcusable to leave children without school.
 On this solemn day of remembrance we can all take joy in the fact that Bin Laden's last sight was a Navy SEAL pulling the trigger.
 My  #TrumpTuesday interview with Ken Langone & Dick Grasso discussing the Chicago teachers' strike  2012 
 Discussing the 9/11 attack and coverage with  while hosting the 25th anniversary of his  show 
 An impromptu interview I did with German TV on 9/11 down by Ground Zero discussing the attack and WTC Towers 
 Today we remember and honor our fellow Americans and NYPD and FDNY who fell 11 years ago.
 Obama called August's job report "progress." Overall, 96K new jobs & over 173K new people on food stamps 
 Why has Barack Obama repeatedly told inconsistent stories about his religious background?  Who is he?
 Barack Obama used to mock Bush's 300K monthly job reports  Now Obama wishes he could have a month half as good.
 George Will is a pathetic columnist. His last article calling College Football 'progressive' is almost as dumb as his previous on the 
 Our brilliant gov't phased out gas for air conditioners due to global warming. Now it's selling heavy on the (cont) 
 Great win by the  yesterday.  played a terrific opener to what should be a big time season.
 . a proven job creator, is running in a very close race for Senate in Connecticut. Support her here 
 Flashback: "Trump, Others Tweet for Release of Condemned Iranian Pastor"  #Nadarkhani was released this past Saturday.
 The jobs report is a disaster. Can only get worse--with other countries "eating our lunch."
 Obama is taunting the Republicans on the birther issue. They should call his bluff & demand the REAL facts. He (cont) 
 Obama asked a 7 yr old for his birth certificate. He's "in your face" because the Republicans dropped the ball. (cont) 
 Thanks for the nice commentary from the  
 Amazing that Pastor Youcef #Nadarkhani is now a free man. I hope he is able to practice his Christian faith in the future.
 Wall Street Journal states "overseas suppliers trounce US panel makers"--meaning solar panels are made outside of our country.
 Congratulations to  I agree with John McEnroe--she's the greatest women's tennis player of all time.
 In today's #trumpvlog I speak about Clint Eastwood, the #DNC, and Drew Peterson- 
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM. Tune in!
 One of the best moves I ever made was staying out of last decade's artificial real estate boom. But I used the downturn to my advantage.
 During  presidency, median family income has fallen 4.8%  Terrible for the middle class.
 A lot of people strongly advised me against doing  Next week we start filming the record 13th season Hence, go with your gut!
 If  had to use the same labor participation he had when he entered office then the unemployment number would be 11.2%
 This chart from AEI's  shows how terrible  'recovery' really is:  Disaster.
 Unemployment rate only dropped because more people are out of labor force & have stopped looking for work.Not a real recovery, phony numbers
 There are now 119,000 fewer Americans employed than there were in July. The economy is still terrible.
 Today's job report is dismal. Now a record 88,921,000 Americans are no longer in the work force.
 Drew Peterson, a real sleaze, just convicted of killing wife. Change the law so he gets death penalty.
 Dems had a very good and professional convention. The Republicans must be smart and tough--and fast!
 The Republicans must get Virgil Goode out of the race in Virginia. He will take votes away from 
 The YouTube of the 2012 Miss USA contestants,  and me singing "Call Me Maybe"  has over 2M views.
 Under  1 out of every 7 Americans is on food stamps.
 Scary--while  has been POTUS for 1.6% of America's history, he has amassed 33.3% of the total debt.
 The Chinese are mistreating Hillary Clinton on her trip  They have zero respect for us. Outrageous!
 Remember while  is lauding himself tonight with self-indulgent compliments we have our brave soldiers fighting in Afghanistan.
 After  speech tonight--which should be well delivered--reality will hit Friday morning when the new jobs report is released.
 The delegates at the  convention keep shouting "Four More Years." Four more years of 18% real unemployment and another $6T in debt?
 Now we will never know if  would have been able to fill Bank of America Stadium. Pretty convenient.
 . is now taking credit for changing party platform language but he reviewed it prior to the convention 
 Iran is flying supply planes to Syria through Iraqi airspace. Thank you, United States, for making this possible!
 Bill Clinton did a great job last night--the Democrats are lucky to have him. Do you really believe he likes 
 Once again under the US has fallen down the ranks of global competitiveness  We must do better.
 Other networks are begging me to do a show--I can't because I'm doing the Apprentice!
 Scary thought--is the sexual pervert Anthony Weiner now in Charlotte? Did he bring his phone with him?
 The Democrats dropped all references to God from their platform. Not good!
 Have you seen the new #TRUMP line of clothing, apparel and fragrances  Selling like hotcakes. Great for Christmas gifts, etc.
 Better off? The $16T US debt works out to $136,260 per household, a 50% increase since  took office.
 North Carolina is a fantastic state with wonderful people. I enjoy my time there when I visit Trump National Charlotte.
 I wish the 23 million who are unemployed were able to celebrate like the Democrats in Charlotte right now.
 Almost every T.V. show is asking me to go on--especially the  It's simple--I get the ratings!
 . is a special player. After winning the Gold for the US in the Olympics, it looks like she will (cont) 
 With all the talk of fiscal responsibility at the  convention yesterday, it was ironic that the debt passed $16T.
 . revise your decision to quit--go back and fight.
 Why does US doping agency destroy an American icon,  for events that took place years ago in France?
 . teammate is angry and jealous--he is no Lance.
 Very good speech by  under great pressure--Dems should be proud!
 No surprise.  is letting the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt default on their US loans  Big mistake!
 July U.S. construction had biggest drop in 12months. Bad indicator on economic numbers for rest of the year.
 What message does it send when  campaign has to spin whether America is better off than it was 4 years ago?
 OPEC is better off than they were 4 years ago. Gas has more than doubled during  term. Outrageous!
 The Chinese are better off than they were 4 years ago. They have stolen even more from us in jobs & trade during  term.
 China now 'warns' us against being involved in sea disputes 
 NBC Wall St Journal Poll of African American voters: 94%  0%  worse than Hillary's old numbers. Is that racism?
 With our national debt passing $16T during the  convention,  has amassed more debt than the first 42 presidents. Scary.
 Record setting gas prices in the U.S. -- we're really looking dumb. Lots of $'s being made on us.
 The media can track down  old girlfriend and marathon time but can't find  college applications or other info.
 Smart move by  having Pres. Bill Clinton deliver the  convention keynote.
 This week the  convention will deliver hard hits on   will regret being soft on  last week.
 . of  is terrific--get better soon.
 . claims to have policies for working people...
 .....how does it help to have record high labor day gas prices for them...in Charlotte?! 
 Is this Hope & Change? A record 46.7M Americans were on food stamps this past June. We must do better.
 Why does  have such a fascination with my plane? He is more than welcomed to come for a ride.
 Joe Paterno's family should sue the idiots  that made that ridiculous deal--and commissioned the one sided report.
 My interview with  was the highest rated show in the history of 
 The women of #WTA are putting on a great show in this year's US Open. Amazing athletes.
 . is playing great tennis in this US Open. I am pulling for him today.
 What a shame  game--first of many. School legacy is ruined!
 Amazing-- starts filming a record 13th season in just one week. This 'All Star season will be a big treat for the fans.
 . and  should have named their son Donald!
 Sorry to hear of the passing of  He was a talented actor and a wonderful fiance to my friend  Will be missed.
 Via  washtimes "The Trump Factor: billionaire leads Republicans in tough fight against Obama"  by 
 My #TrumpTuesday  interview discussing the housing market,  convention & Clint Eastwood's speech 
 Slight conflict--I like  called me and said great things about my daughter 
 . bombed again. Didn't get co-host job with  He would not have delivered the ratings anyway.Michael S will be great.
 It's amazing how much people are enjoying playing at the Trump Scotland course. The dunes are absolutely incredible. 
 As I predicted 1 year ago, gasoline prices hit a record high today...OPEC is having a ball at our expense.
 Great going Andy Roddick! Another victory for a fabulous player. Brooklyn Decker is good luck.
 I win awards for speaking-but the enemies either won't comment or will say only bad...leave Clint alone!
 If you have a speech-one that would put Winston Churchill to shame, liberals would find a way to make it sound terrible!
  on  tonight with her fabulous Melania Timepieces & Jewelry. Tune in at 1AM EST!
 Republicans are always saying Obama is such a nice guy. When will they learn that he is not?
 Andy Roddick...a great tennis player is a fantastic guy with a wonderful wife.
 Republicans should have been much tougher on Obama. Just wait until you see what Obama does to Romney at the DNC!
 China is now deploying drones across ocean routes used for trade  They stole the technology from us.
 . assault on coal and gas and oil will send energy and manufacturing jobs to China." --
 I am sure the Chinese are getting anxious. They watch the polls.  won't let them cheat us anymore.
 We have all the cards. Now is the time to make a great deal with Iran.
 . was great the other night. People love him.
 . entire life and career have built prosperity and growth.
 I loved watching Clint Eastwood last night--he was terrific!
 Gas prices are about to hit a record high during the Labor Day weekend.  could have stopped this.
 It's Friday, how many advertisers dropped  today?
 A fact--golfers don't get aches & pains like others who don't golf. It is amazingly remedial.
 Of course  attacked 'birthers' in praising  speech. Chris has completely lost it.
 Letterman  begging me to go back on his low rated show--calls lots--must apologize for racist comment.
 Too busy playing golf?  sends form letters with an electronic signature to the parents of fallen SEALs 
 I am impressed with how clearly  explains the challenges we face and the solutions  will bring as President.
 Book on Bin Laden is a terrible violation of code--makes  story a big lie.
 I wonder what  was thinking last night as  delivered that knockout speech. Joe should call in sick for the VP debate.
 The dummies left Iraq (and Libya) without the oil!
 Congratulations to  on last night's tremendous speech. Mike united the party faithful and explained that we can do better.
 Only two weeks until we start shooting  We really have something amazing for the fans this year.
 Gas prices are way too high. With an economy contracting and lower demand, how do OPEC & the speculators get away with this?!
 Even the SEALS who killed Bin Laden don't like  
 It's Thursday and again I ask--how much money is China stealing from us?
 I was putting together my early deals in New York & I was advised by many that I was too young. Believe in yourself & you can do anything.
 China's media is attacking  while endorsing   Of course. Mitt knows it's Time To Get Tough.
 I am astonished that the media continues to lie.  gutted welfare reform. It is a fact!
 It's Wednesday, how much money is China stealing from us today?
 Great speech by my good friend  He did something you won't hear at  convention---tell the truth.
 My  #TrumpTuesday interview discussing the 2012 election, OPEC ripping us off &  job policy 
 Congratulations to  on delivering a knock out speech last night. America can't wait to call her our First Lady.
 An excerpt of my  interview at the Sarasota 'Statesman of the Year' dinner discussing the Tea Party 
 China must be worried that  will win this November. They have never had such a pushover like 
 What a coincidence--Michelle Obama called Kenya  "homeland" in 2008 
 . dismal job record is reason alone that he must be defeated this November.
 I am very worried that if  is re-elected then Medicare will be destroyed. We must take care of our seniors.
 I can't wait to read this...RT  SEAL Book Explodes, Obama Furious 
 . Super PAC has continually called  a "murderer"  Ironic since Obama is destroying Medicare.
 It's Tuesday--how much inflation has  spending caused today on the price of food and gas?
 . is going to do a fantastic job tonight explaining why  should be elected and  has to go.
 . and I are looking forward to watching  speech tonight. She is an amazing woman who will be a great First Lady!
 Happy to hear that  Faith and Freedom chapters are at the  convention supporting  We must be united to win!
 Remember when  ran for Governor of California. She got 3 votes.
 Ask China if their rapidly expanding (with our money) Navy or Armed Forces are going "green" -- They would laugh in your face!
 . everyone adores you- including me- get well fast!
 My   interview discussing the  Convention, businesses making products in China and unemployment 
 The Bay Bridge in San Francisco is being built by the Chinese--tremendous cost overruns. A total mess. We should build our own bridges, etc
 Don't think my statement on  was harsh, if you knew her and the phony Huffington Post you would understand--- more to follow.
 . is unattractive both inside and out. I fully understand why her former husband left her for a man- he made a good decision.
 . writes that " should pray that China overtakes US"  Don't worry, he is making it happen.
 The US Navy wants to go "green." Our Navy should use the best & most powerful fuel & not play games. Give me a break!
 As usual, the weather people got it wrong in Tampa. They just look for headlines & ratings!
 Media silent when  called  a murderer & felon. Mitt mentions 'birth certificate' and they go nuts. Double standard!
 If the Democrats want to attack 'Birthers' then they should at least spell it correctly 
 . has completely failed the American people. U.S. annual incomes have fallen over 5% during his term 
 Look what happened to the autism rate from 1983-2008 since one-time massive shots were given to children- 
 It is very sad to see what  has done with NASA. He has gutted the program and made us dependent on the Russians.
 Sorry to hear of the passing of Neil Armstrong over the weekend. He was an American hero.
 One point I made last night and will continue to push is that the  can't be pollitically correct. We must fight fire with fire.
 . is doing a fantastic job not only hosting the  convention but managing Hurricane Isaac. A true leader.
 . Priebus is doing a great job--fantastic guy. But no more birther apologies.
 I knew Chris Matthews when he was sane and, quite honestly, wonderful. Now he's gone off the deep end as an Obama surrogate. 
 While  only made a joke last Friday, he touched on an issue that is very serious to millions of Americans.
 Via  " Exclusive:  on  birther comment" 
 There were over 1,000 attendees at the Sarasota GOP award dinner honoring me as 'Statesman of the Year.'  and I were honored.
 My  interview at the Sarasota GOP event discussing why I was honored as Statesman of the Year 
 Watch this amazing video of #TrumpScotland- 
 My interview with  at the Sarasota "Statesman of the Year" award dinner discussing the 2012 election 
 . is petrified of the birther issue so they go on the offensive to try & make the Republicans feel (cont) 
 Why do the Republicans keep apologizing on the so called "birther" issue? No more apologies--take the offensive!
 Nice letter from Macy's great & talented boss, Terry L. 
 Great evening in Sarasota FL last night. Record crowd--I loved the people & the energy.
 . is begging the Eurozone to keep Greece in until after 11.6.12. He thinks the world revolves around his re-election.
 What priorities -- we have over 20% real unemployment and no growth.
 . sent over 100,000 jobs and Canadian oil to China all because he would not approve Keystone XL.
 I am sure the  will do a great job bracketing the  convention. They are a tremendous statewide organization.
 It's Friday. How many bald eagles did wind turbines kill today? They are an environmental & aesthetic disaster.
 . '2016: Obama's America' is expanding to over 1,000 theaters this weekend. Will be highest grossing documentary in 2012. !!
 Florida has been very good to me. I am really esxcited to give back at the Sarasota GOP event and  convention. Will be fun!
 Life brings you many surprises. As a child I used to vacation with my family at the Doral in Miami. Now I own it. 
 Here is a letter I received yesterday from someone who has had personal experience with our health care situation. 
 I am proud of the Tea Party. These great patriots have accomplished so much in strengthening our country in only 3 short years.
 Disgusting-- supporters are launching an anti-Mormon whisper campaign  Shameful but no surprise.
 . is bankrupting this country. His budget adds another $4.4T to the debt, putting us over $20T in total debt by 2016.
 Terrible tragedy at the Empire State Building today. Must have fast trials and death penalty for the animals.
 Via  "Falwell on Trump: He 'was willing to say publicly' what conservatives said 'privately'" 
 Former Navy SEAL Questions  birthplace 
 Dishonest reporters knowingly write lies that I said, “children should not get vaccinated.” I believe fully (cont) 
 . should immediately reconsider or his legacy is ruined.
 I am very surprised that  gave up. I never thought he was a quitter...
 Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood President is visiting us next month.  is so excited.
 The Muslim brotherhood is sending tanks into the Sinai & saying it doesn't violate Camp David accord.
 A hurricane will be coming to Tampa. My  convention surprise hits Monday night!
 The independent watchdog who exonerated  for the failed green energy loans just donated $52,500 to Obama's campaign.
 The opening of #TrumpScotland- an exciting day on perhaps the world's best golf course, watch the video- 
 . will make us energy independent by 2020   will keep wasting money on Solyndra projects.
  You have already made plenty because of me. How about a 50/50 cut(just joking) see you soon!
 ...Spread shots out over long period and watch positive result.
 Massive combined inoculations to small children is the cause for big increase in autism....
 Amazing-- survived one more day without folding. The clock is ticking...
 In any business venture, remember that branding is one of the most crucial aspects of your enterprise. Fight hard for that brand of yours.
 Wind turbines are a scourge to communities and wildlife. They are environmental disasters.
 It is truly an honor that His Eminence Archbishop of New York  will be delivering the benediction at the  convention.
 It's Thursday. I wonder how much money  drained from Medicare today to finance ObamaCare.
 Great new ad from  titled "Nothing's Free"  detailing both the high costs and taxes of ObamaCare.
 Via  " to speak at  
 Today we just passed 1.4 million twitter followers..
 It's sad to see once decent newspapers like  failing so badly. I just don't know if they can be saved.
 One of the best moves I made early in my career was buying the air rights from Tiffany's flagship. Trump Tower gleams over Fifth Avenue.
 Here's a sneak peek at the  convention theme: "It's not our fault. Blame Bush. Oh, and government built it."
 It's Wednesday. I wonder how much money  borrowed from China today?
 . said he doesn't take the Navy Seals campaigning against him "too seriously."
 Can't wait to meet patriotic small business owners next week in Sarasota and Tampa! Hey  We Did Build It!
 . book, "A Nation of Wusses" is an excellent read--especially page 10. Go get it!
 Congratulations to  Derek Jeter on passing Eddie Murray last night to become the 11th all-time  hit leader.
 We are about to have a record $500B trade deficit with the Chinese this year. That money should be back here financing jobs in America.
 Putin just sent a Russian nuclear sub to the Gulf of Mexico.  can't be bothered, he is too concerned with  taxes.
 Gas prices are soaring. $4.12 in CA. OPEC is laughing at how stupid we are.
 . was caught telling Russian PM  that he can be more 'flexible' in his second term. Russia thinks he's weak.
 My shirts, ties and fragrance are doing "great" at  them! Make fantastic gifts.
 . thinks  is "What Washington's Social Scene Needs"  Truth is, she's amazing.
 Many people will be surprised at what is about to be released concerning  background. I, for one, won't be.
 It's amazing how many people still come up to me to thank me for 'The Art of The Deal.' The book has changed a lot of lives.
 I am tired of  talking about  father. Why don't we discuss Barack Obama Sr.!
 Only three weeks until the new season of  begins filming--great all-star cast.
 Glad to hear  attack ad featuring my plane is playing in North Carolina. Free ad time for Trump National in Charlotte!
 Distressed real estate opportunities can make great investments. You need the foresight and instincts to know the property's true potential.
 Every economic climate, whether an uptick or downturn, presents new opportunities and challenges.
 Amazing--both Transformers & Dark Knight Rises featured Trump properties and each grossed over $1B. Just coincidence.
 . was great on  last night. Roger and Larry are good friends!
 It's Tuesday. I wonder how much money  lost today--great purchase AOL
 Glad to hear that  has put some strong anti-China referendums in the  convention platform.
 We have to get tough with China before they destroy us.
 In less than a week I'll be honored by Sarasota GOP as Statesman of the Year & then give my big surprise to  convention. Will be fun!
 If you have any doubt that  must be defeated see  '2016: Obama's America.' Amazing film!
 More of my #TRUMPTUESDAY  interview discussing how the US gets killed negotiating with other countries 
 My  interview discussing #TRUMPTUESDAYS high ratings,  statement &  policies 
 My  interview discussing how  is running a hateful campaign & the  convention 'Surprise' 
 The  released a new #StrongisBeautiful celebrity campaign today. Amazing athletes. Proud to be a part of this. 
 Congratulations to Billy Payne and  on doing the right thing.
 . get better fast. I'm starting to miss you!
 Why are we continuing to train these Afghanis who then shoot our soldiers in the back? Afghanistan is a complete waste. Time to come home!
 Unemployment is up in 44 states showing July's unemployment numbers to be broad based   is a job killer.
 Scary thought-- is a heartbeat away from the Presidency.
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday  AM. Tune in!
 Americans already believe that  is better qualified to serve as President over   No surprise.
 Oil is rising back over $100 barrel. OPEC loves to rip us off. Why shouldn't they--they always get away with it.
  Not everybody has good Trump judgment.
 Always fun to watch the  Derek Jeter had a great weekend.
 Congratulations to  and Arnold  on 'Expendables 2' #1 box office opening. Still going strong!
 Watch Robert Gibbs as  spokesman (before he was fired) lie that  bowed to the Saudis 
 Remember when Robert Gibbs was telling everyone he was being hired by Facebook? Now he's back in a demoted  campaign position.
 Fact--Robert Gibbs wanted a 'policy' job in the  The answer was no.
 Former  spokesman Robert Gibbs was immediately fired after the 2010 midterms. Even  knows for sure!
 Quote by  in  feature "The Trump brand moves beyond real estate..." 
 From  Morning Score "Trump Fires Back at Gibbs Smear" & "Trump will get a 'surprise' Monday Role" 
 Great read from  "Trump Fires Back at Obama Campaign Smear" 
 . should be forced to resign- 
 Via  "Donald Trump gets 'surprise' convention role" 
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM--tune in!
 Congratulations to  on leading Virginia to be in the black for a 3rd straight year. He is a fantastic governor.
 If  really loved this country, he wouldn't be destroying it. He has ruined our credit and killed jobs with ObamaCare.
 US government's foreign indebtedness has grown over 72% under  He is bleeding us dry to China.
 The US government's foreign debt is at a record $5.29T  China is laughing all the way to the bank.
 . &  get what needs to be done to reign in China.  gets kicked around by the Chinese.
 Great speech on China by  yesterday where he explains why China is treating  like a "Doormat" 
 Even NY Democrats are avoiding  convention  He is dragging his own party down with him
 Great sign:"We built this business without government help. Obama can kiss our a--!"  Commonly heard now across America!
 . had to give $1,000 to  brother for his child's hospital bill  Isn't that disgraceful?
 Via  "Trump course sparks international interest" 
 My  interview discussing why  is not a nice guy, and who will win the 2012 election 
 My  interview on  discussing why debt commission should be discussed in debates &  convention 
 Jeffrey Robinson's #TrumpTower has it all. The ultra rich, powerful, and beautiful. It's your summer must-read. 
 The country of Georgia is a small wonder. Performing well economically under the leadership of  A great American ally.
 ... is hiding plenty of bad things.
 . shouldn't give additional tax returns until  gives his passport records, college records & applications...
 Wind farms are killing many thousands of birds. They make hunters look like nice people!
 Palm Springs, CA has been destroyed--absolutely destroyed--by the world's ugliest wind farm at the Gateway on Interstate 10. Very very sad!
 Good news -  has pulled ahead in Wisconsin  WIth  on the ticket, Wisconsin is in play.
 I always said  will attack Iran, in some form, prior to the election.
 . could very well be close to attacking Iran. Could be this election's big October surprise...
 Jennifer Aniston is engaged--she's a great person and I wish her well.
 There are only 22 days for  to drop  Obama is not a loyal guy. I think he is strongly considering it.
 I still hold the all-time attendance and pay per view record at 
 Congratulations to  on passing 1,000 episodes.  is still going strong after all these years-- is great!
 There's only only one person who has defunded Medicare. His name is 
 Certain Internet sites are like a bad epidemic that won't go away---others are terrific
 A great photo of  and me 
 I wonder what the work atmosphere is like  It must be hard working at a dying institution.
 What's more dangerous for the country--the Iranian nuclear threat or  as President?
 My interview with Don Imus on  discussing my  convention surprise &  China policy 
 The Huffington Post is such a loser--it will die just as AOL is dying, What a stupid deal AOL made to buy it!
 Military reps have attacked  over Bin Laden leaks--they believe he's just using this for his benefit. Not a big surprise...
 One of the hardest jobs in politics must be cleaning up after  gaffes. I feel sorry for his spokespeople.
 The  should have an amazing team next year with Kobe, Nash and Howard. Will be fun to watch.
 Chelsea Clinton will be very successful in the world of politics. She's always been a great person--a winner. (cont) 
  is suggesting football is going away and  will lose.  is a moron.
 $716 Billion from Medicare by  When will it end?
 Congratulations to Linda McMahon on her victory in the Connecticut Senate primary. She is an amazing woman--smart as you get! 
 I have always done well with properties fronting on oceans, lakes and rivers. If something works, stay with it.
 My acquisition of the Doral in Maimi will be a major success for the Trump Organization. The re-building is on schedule.
 I have hired renowned golf course architect Gil Hanse to rebuild The Blue Monster at Doral. He designed the 2016 (cont) 
 Scary thought--what is the pervert Anthony Weiner doing with all the free time he has. Does he collect unemployment?
 . visited today- 
 Richard Mourdock--a very good man running for the Senate in Indiana. Hopefully, he will win! 
 I'm really glad that  no longer says what a nice guy  is.
 Lightweight reporter Alex Pareene  is known as a total joke in political circles. Hence, he writes for Loser Salon. 
 Congratulations to  on winning last night's primary!
 While  is a gaffe machine, yesterday's comments that  will "put y'all back in chains" was not at all proper.
 Watch  explain how "'It's irrefutable' that President Obama is damaging Medicare'" 
 Nobody wants wind turbines, they are failing all over the world and need massive subsidy--a disaster for taxpayers.
 . is promoting ugly, inefficient, unreliable, bird-killing, noisy, neighborhood-destroying wind turbines. Big mistake.
 The Euro is going to collapse soon. Cross border lending is already down and banks are stopping their Euro investments.
 Great news--Chinese companies who were fixing prices and accounting are leaving the US stock market  #TimeToGetTough
 Every sports fan is treated to an All Star game. The loyal and growing fan base of  will be getting a much bigger treat!
 By the US winning the Olympic medal count, we proved that both the American spirit & talent is greater than a 1.4B population. USA!
 Glad to hear  will be delivering the Keynote for the  convention. He will deliver a strong message.
 Today I am working on my 'big surprise' for the  convention. Everyone will love it.
 Now is the time to buy a house if you can DIRECTLY from a bank. They want to get rid of all their foreclosures.
 Via  "Donald Trump to 'surprise' GOP convention. What might he do?"  Answer: Something major!
 Via  "Trump will have 'memorable' role at GOP convention"  It's true, just wait and see...
 My  interview discussing  pick of  how to frame Medicare debate &  convention 
 Today is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM. Tune in!
 Great going  on winning yesterday’s PGA championship. Already two majors- amazing.
 Congratulations to our Olympic team for by far winning the most medals, including first place gold.
 In ’08,  predicted that US headed toward bankruptcy   has added over $6T in debt since. Scary.
 “Borrowing and spending is not the way to prosperity.” -- 
 In four weeks the ‘All Star’ cast of  begins filming what will be another great season! Everyone is in for a treat.
 Glad to hear patriotic Americans are organizing a movement this August to boycott Chinese products  People get it!
 Why would anyone let pervert  use their house? He was always a bad guy- now he’s trying to make nice to everyone.
 Obama Care stole more then $500M from Medicare.
 Trump National Golf Club LA & Trump International Scotland are open to the public. You can make reservations to play.
 Trump Chicago was featured in Transformers 3. Trump Tower was featured in Dark Knight Rises. Both are summer blockbusters. #MidasTouch
 Congratulations to Derek Jeter on tying Hank Aaron’s  double record on Saturday. Derek is one of the greatest  ever.
 Amazing ad by #TeamRomney: America’s Comback Team featuring  
 BIG - 10K greeted  &  in Wisconsin homecoming last night   made a great move!
 The Chicago machine is scared.  shows that  will run on a conservative & coherent platform. 85 days until victory!
 Jeffrey Robinson’s #TrumpTower has it all. The ultra rich, powerful, and beautiful. It’s your summer must-read 
 The  choice was a bold pick by  Energizes the base and changes the trajectory of the race. #RomneyRyan2012
 Today  will borrow 40 cents on every dollar he spends from China. Just another day at the office.
 My  interview discussing Trump International in Scotland, why  is a bold choice & 2012 race 
 Monday morning 7:30 AM I'll be on  Tune in!
 Over 2 million people have lost their jobs since  became POTUS. How many of them still have healthcare?
 Waste-- Dep. of Energy was warned in advance by Treasury that it wasn't loaning $ out in good deals 
 Sad--only 36% think America's best days are ahead while 49% believe they are in the past  We can & must do better.
 Congratulations to our great Women's Olympic Soccer team  on their gold medal. They made us all proud!
 Watch my video blog to see if your questions from my Facebook page were answered- 
 Our airports are Third World--horrible. Let's rebuild them by people who know how to do it--inexpensively.
 . given a raw deal in  story--not fair.
 SUN newspaper/Scotland reports that "Tourism jump is thanks to Trump." 8,000 visitors in one month from 20 countries,,, 
 Newsmax article: 'Trump Declines Prime Time GOP Convention Speech' 
 I will be speaking the night before the RNC in Sarasota, FL, when I receive the "Statesman of the Year" award.
 As we told the  I was asked to speak at the RNC but said no, because I will be doing something much bigger--just watch!
 The failing New York Daily News knowingly incorrectly reported that I wanted to speak at the Republican National Convention--wrong!
 China is cooking up conspiracy theories that the Olympics are rigged.  They don't understand why they can't cheat.
 All recent Presidents have released their transcripts. What is  hiding?
 The Penn State Board should resign based on the grossly incompetent way they handled the NCAA. They gave away (cont) 
 Received a beautiful letter from Joe Paterno's son, Jay. He really loved and respected his father.
 . CEO John Schnatte has told shareholders that ObamaCare will force him to raise pizza prices  REPEAL!
 . and  I gave a great review of your show in my #trumpvlog 
 A review of  show, great press on Trump International Golf Links Scotland, and more in today's #trumpvlog- 
 Waste. With 22 new taxes & $1.8T in added debt,  disgraceful 'ObamaCare' will still leave 30M uninsured 
 Just letting China know in advance that the USA will win the medal count in the Olympics. Even with your cheating you can't beat us.
 . 'Donald Trump' song is at 64.5M views on YouTube  You're welcome Mac!
 Even more  crony capitalism & corruption. We are guaranteeing a $105M loan to another Obama donor 
 See Newsmax story re Republican National Convention 
 Over 100M are now receiving some form of welfare  We must do better.  has the vision to get America working.
 The brand new season of  starts filming in less than 5 weeks. The 'All Star' cast will be announced very soon.
 I wonder if  ever had an Indonesian passport. Did he become an Indonesian citizen when he lived there?
 Have you been to the  in the Trump Tower Atrium? Best meatloaf in the City--my mother's famous recipe. 212.836.3249
 To all struggling young entrepreneurs--stay positive in this tough climate and keep looking for good deals. They are out there.
 DESPERATE-  is already asking supporters to 'find dirt' on  VP picks  Dirty tactics.
 These are facts: In 2001, the US opened its markets to China & since then more than 2 million Americans can't (cont) 
 Job openings are at a 4 year high but businesses aren't hiring  Why? ObamaCare, US debt &  tax plan.
 . Rob our children's future by borrowing from the Chinese to pay for socialist programs that will bankrupt us.
 No surprise that China was caught cheating in the Olympics. That's the Chinese M.O. - Lie, Cheat & Steal in all international dealings.
 Pathetic-- is 'sweetening' his offer to the Taliban  Read 'The Art of The Deal.'
 I always enjoy being interivewed on  by John Gambling. My father Fred used to listen to his father's show.
 My  interview on The John Gambling Show discussing the 2012 election, Trump real estate projects & our airports 
 Our major airports are decaying. It's embarrassing. We need to have them renovated by competent professionals--and fast.
 My  interview on  discussing the  convention,  sealed records & real estate advice 
 My  interview on  discussing  dirty tactics & how  should respond 
 The NYPost reports " Magazine dropped 18% to only 283,938 newsstand copies sold." Very sad & their bloggers are doing even worse!
 Great article by   -- "Obama's College Classmate: 'The Obama Scandal Is at Columbia'" 
 Tucson killer Loughner should be given the death penalty, not his plea bargained life in prison--which will cost (cont) 
 . is doing very badly. Also, very inaccurate stories. Like AOL, when will they fail?
 People are finally beginning to hit China and OPEC. They never give me credit for being the first--by far--but that's okay!
 Looking forward to meeting the great folks of Sarasota GOP party when I am honored as 'Statesman of the Year.' Should be a wonderful time.
 Glad that  is hitting  on ending work requirements for welfare. Obama attacks the American work ethic.
 Tune in for my interview with  tonight at 10 pm, 
 I am honored that  has featured my plane in one of his attack ads. It was made in America!
 A 'confidential source' has called my office and told me that  has added over $6T to the new national debt & ruined US credit.
 Glad to hear that  will be speaking at the  Convention. He is a true conservative and fantastic governor!
 To the geniuses at 'Americans United for Change': the more you tax me the less people I employ. Get it?
 Now the world is looking to China for an economic 'lift'   has ruined our economic hegemony.
 I have founded and run one of the largest real estate empires in the world. I employ thousands of people. Why am I the enemy?
 The  has 'clarified' that the unemployment is actually 8.254% not 8.3%  A little sensitive are we?
 The real outsourcer -  is funding German automakers with the GM bailout money  How does that help us?
 Now China 'calls in' US diplomats to lecture them on their illegal escapades.  The new reality.  is weak.
 I went to  play. I will be doing a review in the next #trumpvlog.
 Glad to hear Clint Eastwood endorsed  He understands that America needs a big boost to be strong again.
 Outrageous-- is suing to suppress the military vote in Ohio  Our Commander in Chief should be ashamed.
 My  interview discussing the  convention,  sealed records &  tax claim 
 The real war on women--over 175,000 fewer held jobs in July & 94,000 dropped out of labor force  We must do better.
 Congratulations to  marked the 1 YR anniversary of our country's credit being downgraded 
 The Senate should be more concerned about actually passing a budget than spreading lies about  taxes.
 The Fed should not do another 'stimulus.' We can't keep spending our children's future away on waste.
 Convenient - David Plouffe collected $100G fee from Iranian affiliate only a month before joining  
 Wrong-- '08 campaign manager & current Senior WH Advisor collected $100G fee from Iranian affiliate 
 . will create 2 million new jobs if elected POTUS. If reelected,  will create over $12T in new debt. Easy choice.
 An 'extremely credible source' has called my office and told me that  bought his house with the help of Tony Rezko.
 An 'extremely credible source' has called my office and told me that  birth certificate is a fraud.
 An 'extremely credible source' has called my office & told me that  applied to Occidental as a foreign student--think about it!
 All indications are that every Solyndra warning was simply ignored by    was set on wasting $$$
 China's Olympic training program is abusive  It is modern day slavery & shameful. Their (cont) 
 How much longer can  keep on losing advertisers and readers? A sad decline for a once wonderful read!
 Our athletes in the Olympics are proving once again to be the greatest competitors in the world. Makes us proud to be Americans.
 Congratulations to  on concluding the greatest Olympic career ever. You have made us all very proud.
 Listen to my EVP  on America's Radio News Network right now. If I know Michael, it will be great.
 My  interview with  discussing the upcoming season of  & the 2012 election 
 Congratulations to Gabby Douglas on winning the Gold for the USA in gymnastics. She is terrific!
 The U-6 real unemployment rate is even scarier than the national unemployment rate.  is overseeing a Depression.
 Over 150,000 more of our fellow Americans dropped out of the workforce in July.  is a disaster!
 New job numbers once again show no growth or recovery. Unemployment has been over 8% for 41 straight months--now up to 8.3%
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM. Tune in!
 US interest payments on the debt have already passed $375B this year  China is laughing at us---as usual.
 Great new ad from  'Next Year...President  in Jerusalem, the Capital of Israel' 
 Good-- is trying to eliminate the tax on Olympic medals  Our athletes should not be taxed on their wins.
 Make sure to grab your copy of this month's  detailing "The Trump Effect" 
 We need a President who understands the economy -  has US unemployment at 8.2% in July, up from 8% in June 
 In '08,  hit Bush for secrecy  When will Obama release all his sealed college records?!
 So generous and pious! After spending millions of our tax dollars on his campaign through travel,  donated to himself.
 More lies and deceptions-- is having his ex-staffers write 'independent' studies for his reelection 
 The U.S. manufacturing sector has suffered its greatest order losses under  He has stood idle while China steals our jobs.
 Jobless claims rose yet again last week   economic record is abysmal--we can do much better.
  Thanks for the beautiful picture--- you are fantastic!
 Congratulations to  on his Texas primary victory last night. He will be an outstanding Senator.
 The deficits under  are the highest in America's history. Why is he bankrupting our country?
 Now  is issuing regulatory demands to states ordering no firings in November 
 . Op-Ed "Culture Does Matter" : 
 Ohio Senator   knows how to return prosperity:  #Mitt2012 #tcot
 Good article: "What Happened to American Men" from  by Michael Cohen 
 NEW  TV AD "Dream" - For these small businesses, hope and change was not so kind:  #tcot
 The American gymnastic team was great--our country should take their lead.
 . are the greatest Olympic champion of them all. Fantastic job!
 Consumer spending is continuing to fall with weak June numbers.  policies have created a climate (cont) 
 No member of Congress should be eligible for re-election if our country's budget is not balanced---deficits not allowed!
 You pick it! #1. Anybody that says anything derogatory about  is labeled stupid, insane, or (cont) 
 Enjoying the Olympics. Great coverage by  as well. GO TEAM USA!
 More waste, fraud and abuse - over $460M in food stamps went to ineligible households  Where's the accountability?
 Attended last night's  game--Derek Jeter is both a great player and a great guy.
 In '08  called Jerusalem Israel's capital  Now he attacks  on Jerusalem 
 Another example of  diplomatic triumphs--he gave the Queen of England an iIPod filled with his speeches.
 Great to see  being well-received in Poland  The Poles understand the value of freedom through strength
 The polling numbers for 2012 are very interesting--will Americans ultimately want their leaders to be 'likeable' or 'competent'?
 Great job to Missy Franklin. She's got a smile that can take over the world. She's also a major talent. Great going, Missy!
 My  interview discussing 2012 election polls,  current trip & the US housing & land market 
 . blocked Keystone. Now China is preparing a massive $1.5B oil deal with Canada.  A terrible deal for US!
 Reckless-- is projecting $1.2T deficit from 2012 budget & a projected $25.4T debt in a decade 
 Not only does ObamaCare have at least 21 new taxes but it will lead to a tremendous doctor shortfall.
 The Chinese are illegally dumping bird-killing wind turbines on our shores. Only one of many grievances--we should act.
 The US GDP in 2010 was 4.1%, down to 2% in 2011 & now 1.5%. I guess  plan is not working!
 . should be careful questioning  on diplomacy--how many times has Obama apologized for our country on foreign soil?!
 . bowed to the Saudi King in public--yet the Dems are questioning  diplomatic skills.
 The difference between  and  campaign promises to  is that Mitt will actually keep all of his.
 The text of  speech from   Mitt will be a trusted friend of  when he is President.
 Smart move by the Democrats to have Pres.  play a key role in their convention.
 - repeatedly canceled the Bin Laden operation in January & March '11  Wasn't a tough decision!
 My  interview discussing  sucessful foreign trip, the economic numbers & 2012 election 
 Tomorrow morning 7:30 AM  #TrumpTuesday Tune in!
 All the national security leaks coming from   were clearly made for political gain. Where's the outrage!?
 Just as I predicted,  has not allowed an independent investigation into the national security leaks from his cabinet.
 Why has  allowed the Muslim Brotherhood to visit the  What Hope & Change!
 Scary-Didn't  just say "his plan worked?"  Great plan--GDP was 1.5% last 3 months 
 The  are going to have a terrific season.  &  will do great things on the field.
 What a 'nice guy' - 97% of  campaign ads have been negative attacks on   Give it back Mitt!
 Good news -  has  beating  49%-44%  Obama was up by 5% at same point in '08.
 I am confident when American public gets to know  the race will go his way. He's honorable & successful man--polls looking good.
 So much for Hope & Change--Democrat voter enthusiasm in 2012 is lower than both 2004 & 2008 
 Hopefully Alex Rodriguez  will get well soon. He took a hard hit.
 Price of corn has jumped over 50%. This will cause a jump in food prices perhaps beyond what we've ever seen. Nasty for the economy.
 My  interview discussing  "You Didn't Build That" comment, the economy and 2012 election 
 Thank you to  a great magazine, for a wonderful cover story on yours truly.
 The Audacity of  Federal Reserve purchased 61% of all debt issued by Treasury in 2011. Killing our children's future.
 The Federal government has $2.7T in assets & $17.5T in total liabilities plus another $4.7T in intergovernmental debt. Have a nice day.
 By folding, Penn State leadership made things worse. The deal is ridiculous & punishes the wrong people. I hope the alumni sue to overturn.
 Amazing how fast all of Joe Paterno's friends abandoned him. They ran for the hills.
 I knew Joe Paterno. When he heard what he heard, it just wasn't in his world--a different planet!
 Iraq suffers worst bombing--a total mess--I told you so!
 Hope & Change--since  has taken office, the US debt has increased by an average of $64K per taxpayer.
 US Gov't is on the hook for more than a third of the world's entire debt & we wonder why China & OPEC are laughing all the way to the bank!
 Congratulations to  is the first POTUS to run trillion dollar deficits in all four years of his term!
 Remember when  promised you could keep your coverage? Study shows 1 in 10 employers will drop health care 
 Twitter is on  enemies list 
 Now   is ordering "twitter embargoes" during  press conferences  What torture!
 Crony Capitalism & Corruption -  fundraised from Solyndra 'entrepreneurs' last night 
 The Euro is in rough shape. With Germany, who supports the currency, now having a slowdown, the entire Euro could go down. Someday it will.
 Delusional-- claims that his economic plan "worked"  Is the 16% real unemployment part of the plan?
 This can't continue--Federal goverment's debt jumps more than $1T for 5th straight year  China is buying the debt.
 My  interview on the  show discussing Trump properties,  sealed records and 2012 
 . Call the banks and they'll give you a list or a person to speak to.
 I can't stress strongly enough that we are currently in a buyer's residential market.Try to buy directly from a bank.
 The  acquisition of Ichiro was a smart move. I look forward to watching him play.
 . leadership has permanently scarred & perhaps destroyed a great university. They should have (cont) 
 Which campaign is possibly on the trajectory towards insolvency?  At least  is consistent.
 China's domestic economic and political problems prove how pathetic our leadership is in allowing China to rip us off 
 BIG-- is preferred to handle the economy over  by 63%-29% in a  poll 
 . discussing my  interview: "Trump: 'Clamor for  tax returns has died down'" 
 From:  " Public not Worried About  Tax Returns" 
 My  interview discussing housing prices, the GDP numbers, China spreading its wealth and my stock picks. 
 Fast trial and death penalty for maniac in Colorado--- immediately pass speed up legislation.
 Congratulations to my friend Ernie Els on winning the British open. Also to Adam Scott on playing great.
 Read this-- birth certificate "cannot survive judicial scrutiny" because of "phantom numbers" 
 SHOCK--Hugo Chavez endorses   Will he be in Chicago on election night too?
 Jay Carney won't answer reporters questions of "Why Obama won't release his college transcripts"- Come on, Jay!
 You can run but you can't hide--a majority of voters blame  for the bad economy 
 Sarasota,FL local GOP on August 26th is a very hot ticket. Their biggest event ever. I will be there- as "Statesman of the Year".
 US poverty on track to rise to highest since 1960s  We must do better.
 Hypocrite-- has major investments in companies that are outsourcing jobs overseas 
 Midas Touch emphasizes the importance of entrepreneurs—they create jobs! 
 STAPLES =  SOLYNDRA = 
 Under  Bain had an 80% success rate with annual returns of over 50%. Under  America has added over $6T in debt.
 Foreign leaders are already requesting meetings with  to warn that we are viewed as "in decline" 
 So  goes to Florida and to scare seniors about Medicare  ObamaCare guts 500M from Medicare
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM. Tune in!
 Who else could take 16 vacations, play over 100 rounds of golf and hold over 300 fundraisers while serving as (cont) 
 The NYPD has been doing a fantastic job protecting NYC. I hope Chief Ray Kelly is strongly considering running for mayor.
 With 15% US real unemployment and a 16T debt,  Obama's luxurious Aspen vacation - her 16th - cost us over $1M 
 Must read article in  " probe could dwarf Watergate" 
 Weekly jobless claims are now at an astronomical 365,000. Manufacturing sector is suffering badly. We must do better. 
 My  interview discussing America's financial uncertainty due to  and the job report 
 I'll be on  Monday morning at 7:30 AM. Tune in!
 With  listing himself as "Born in Kenya" in 1999  HI laws allowed him to produce a fake certificate. #SCAM
 Bay Bridge in San Fransisco, built in China, keeps getting worse. Cost overruns are out of control --- China is having a field day with us!
 I am impressed with the scam  pulled, but the truth will come out.
 Breitbart gets it! Vote now-- should release his college application records and grades. He says he (cont) 
 At least 12 dead and 50 wounded in Colorado--bring back fast trials & death penalty for mass murderers & terrorists.
 Some really dumb blogger for failing  a magazine whose ads are down almost 18% this year, said I wear a hairpiece --- I DON'T!
 Breitbart gets it! Vote now--Obama should release his college application records & grades. He says he loves (cont) 
 . economic gloom: jobless claims have surged  while factory activity is (cont) 
 Irresponsible! In the last 6 months  has held over 100 fundraisers and not a single meeting with his Job Council.
 More $ thrown away -  gave $20M to Amonix and praised its "success" in '10. It just filed for bankruptcy 
 Great article--a must read by Peter Ferrara at  about "The Biggest Government Spender in World History" 
 I hope Bill Clinton and NEWSMAX's Chris Ruddy are enjoying their mission to Africa. Two great people.
 In 1999  said that he didn't support Welfare Reform  He just gutted the entire program.
 Via  doesn't  release his original book proposal which says he was born in Kenya? 
 Great new campaign ad just released by  
 Since  is on such a "transparency" kick--how about releasing Fast & Furious info to Brian Terry's family? 
 My  interview where I discuss  Job Council,  investigation & 2012 election 
 Corrupt-- largest bundlers are fundraisers linked to the Obama Solyndra boondoggle  Chicago cronyism
 Columbia University stated there was a "computer error" in their system concerning  attendance. (cont) 
 Taking a photo with my family on the opening day of Trump International Golf Links Scotland- 
 The new  motto - "You Own Nothing, Not Even Your Own Success" ...
 So  is celebrating his 'birthday' with a fundraiser in his home he bought with the help of Rezko 
 John Sununu was more right than he even knew yesterday --  indeed needs to "learn how to be an American."
 What recovery? JP Morgan has readjusted Q2 growth down from 1.7% to 1.4% and Q3 to 1.5% with 2012 on a whole at 1.7% 
 What's more important for the American public to have?  tax returns or  sealed records?
 Happy 94th birthday to Nelson Mandela!
 As I always said, the "Birthers" were after the truth. Thanks to   can't hide anymore.
 So  campaign is calling  a potential criminal  How about Obama's Tony Rezko land deal!
 Why does HI Revised Statute 338-17.8 allow an HI resident who doesn't have to be US citizen to procure an official Hawaii birth certificate?
 Congratulations to  on his successful Cold Case Posse investigation which claims  'birth certificate' is fake
  Cindy Adams has a great report on the Dark Knight Rises premiere 
 On the red carpet at the NYC premiere of Dark Knight Rises with  via   
 The class warfare being played by  is the only way he can get reelected. He can't have America focus on his horrendous record.
 Dark Knight Rises is projected to gross over $180 million this weekend. Remember to watch for Trump Tower!
 Weird--why did BarackObama Sr. fail to list  as his son in his 1961 INS application? 
 #BARACKTAX QUOTE: "If you have health insurance, you're not getting hit with a tax."
 Watch  admit Obamacare is a TAX  The GOP must continue to Disrupt, Dismantle & Repeal!
 According to a  poll, over 60% think ObamaCare will make things worse for taxpayers  ObamaCare is a T-A-X.
 Congratulations to John Roberts for making Americans hate the Supreme Court because of his BS 
 For the sake of transparency,  should release all his college applications and transcripts--both from Occidental and Columbia.
 Why would  be spending millions of dollars to hide his records if there was nothing to hide?
 When will we see  passport records (sealed)?
 . needs to make  regret that he ever asked for his tax records.
 My interview in  with  discussing being awarded the 2012 "Statesman of the Year" by Sarasota GOP 
 My  interview discussing why the Fed shouldn't do a QE3,  college records & 2012 election 
 My review of #TheDarkKnightRises and more in today's #trumpvlog- 
 Remember how  did not have any tort reform? Now the trial lawyers are getting ready for even more lawsuits 
 I hope  now starts asking for any & all of  sealed records--it's time.
 . college application would be very very very very interesting!
 If  had such a wonderful academic record why wouldn't he want to show it?
 I wonder what the answer is on  college application to the question: place of birth? Maybe the (cont) 
 Outrageous-- is trying to unilaterally gut welfare reform  He doesn't believe in a strong work ethic.
 So much for Hope and Change.  has already spent over $100M on attack ads across the swing states 
 He has no respect for American exceptionalism.  has outsourced our space program to the Russians 
 Congratulations to  on winning access to federal database  He is making FL a safe & legal election for 2012
 I hope  is recuperating well in LA. Get better! 
 What controversy? 2 'active'  supporters at Bain have confirmed that  left in '99  No story here.
 Bain did not list  as an Executive on its website in 2000   Saul Alinsky tactics won't work!
 Outrageous & Unsustainable!  reckless deficit spending spends our entire 2012 GDP until 7/15 
 Congratulations to  on his fundraising numbers. Cong. West is a superb member.
 Carney Dismisses 'Trump Question' on College Records 
 My  interview discussing how  should release his college applications & records 
 #TrumpTuesday  at 7:30 AM. Tune in!
 Reggie Jackson's statement on A-Rod was 100% correct.
 A drug free A-Rod is just an average baseball player. will soon move him down in the batting order & should renegotiate his contract
 Wife Huma wants  to "pull a  by giving a tell-all interview." Unlike Clinton, Anthony is a sick puppy.
 In his prime, I predicted that  would never be mayor & I was right for all of the wrong reasons.
 New York Post says " trying to make comeback"--he's a sexual pervert & they can never be healed. Huma (cont) 
 My friend  lost his wonderful son Sage this weekend. We all send Sly our love and warmest wishes. (cont) 
 . yellowing paper cover looks like they ran out of money. Their advertising is down almost 18% (cont) 
 I'll be on  this Monday at 7:30 AM. Be sure to tune in.
 Don't believe his whining,  has outspent and outraised  along with the Democrat PACS 
 For America to be great again we must have a President who has been successful and Americans can learn from on how to succeed.
 Via  Sun, "Thrilled Neale's first hole in Don"  Great shot on the 157 yd 16th of Trump Int'l Golf Links!
 In his entire political career,  has never had a tough  opponent before  He is a paper tiger. #GOMITT
 The Football program at Penn State should be suspended.
 Penn State is doing a poor job in bringing its mess to a close.They should be ashamed for hiding Sandusky's crimes all these years...
 A true honor.  considers asking for  college transcripts a "Donald Trump question."  Release it!
 But the attention  gets for not doing so covers up his ineffective record as President.
 . should release all his records (like other Presidents)....
 While  is struggling with ratings,  is consistently doing well. Congrats to Piers!
 Sad--OPEC has really cornered the market. Now  lauds $85/barrel  Crude shouldn't cost more than $25.
 Don't believe the lies--every budget  has delivered to Congress raises the income tax on EVERYONE 
 Think of it---20% of our country is essentially unemployed.
 The underemployment being quoted as 14.9% is way low--real number could be 20%.
 . wants to see 10 yrs of  tax returns--tell him "ok--but we want to see your college applications first.'
 Nasty tactics being used by  campaign against  Must stop saying Obama is a nice man--he is not!
 . finally talking tough on China. He's repeating my exact words. Where has he been for 4 years?
 America's Olympic uniforms are manufactured in China. Burn the uniforms!#U.S.OlympicCommittee
 The House voting to repeal was the first bipartisan vote on ObamaCare. The GOP must continue to Repeal, Defund, Disrupt! #BARACKTAX
 The 18th hole at Trump International Golf Links Scotland- 
 I wonder why  is not going to the NAACP Convention. Is it because he can't answer questions about 14.7% Black unemployment?
 Seth Meyers was terrible co-hosting with Kelly. Marbles in his mouth-& he must stop picking at his hands--insult to the great Regis Philbin!
 Will I be at the RNC Convention? Well, Sarasota is only an hour drive from Tampa 
 Back in NY from Scotland and fighting for our country to get better. Trump International Golf Links Scotland opened to rave reviews.
 Have we ever had a POTUS before  who earned over 1/3 of his income from foreign sources and paid taxes to another country?
 . reported over $269,710 of foreign income out of his gross $894,520 and paid $5,841 in foreign taxes 
 Even the Left realizes that  policies have led to more jobs being outsourced out of this country. 
 Almost daily more discrepancies in  biography continue to arise. Who is this guy?
 Very strange--why do database records contradict  and show he was only at Columbia 1 year? 
 Today  addressed the NAACP.  takes their vote for granted which is why there is such high Black unemployment.
 Nice interview in the  Atlantic of Sarasota GOP Chair Joe Gruters on my 2012 'Statesman of the Year' award 
 Great to see Tony La Russa manage one last game last night. Congratulations to the National League on winning the  All-Star Game.
 Via  "Trump tees off on new golf course in Scotland" 
 Chris Ruddy is always on point: "Trump Opens 'Greatest Golf Course In the World'"  via 
 Great article in the  -- "Donald Trump opens £100m golf course" 
 How can  invoke Richard Nixon against  when Obama just used Executive Privilege on Fast & Furious?!
 What a coincidence?!  campaign logo uses the same font as Cuban communist propaganda posters. 
 Congrats to  has now had over 40 months straight of over 8% unemployment while accruing over $6T (cont) 
 Everyone is talking about how Trump Tower is the exterior for Wayne Enterprises in Dark Knight Rises---it's true. 
 The liberal media is focusing on  bank records. How about reviewing  illegal land deal contracts with Tony Rezko?
 The U-6 Unemployment Rate is over 14.9%. ObamaCare is stopping businesses from both hiring and expanding.
 Pathetic--DNC Chair  is "Happy" with 8.2% unemployment  We must do better. #GOMITT
 Why is  constantly issuing executive orders that are major power grabs of authority? This is the latest 
 Pathetic-- called 8.2% unemployment a "Step in the RIght Direction" 
 Message working--over 80% of likely US voters nationwide believe  will repeal ObamaCare on Day One 
 like other Presidents have.
 . should not give any other further information until  releases the things that everyone wants to see----
 Do you really think  will reveal his college applications and records? I don't.
 President Obama wants  to hand over even more past tax returns- he should when  reveals his college applications.
 I'm in Scotland to open what we hope to be the greatest golf course in the world--- it's amazing.
 I am truly honored to have been chosen Statesman of the Year by the Republican Party of Sarasota County. The (cont) 
 My family and I just arrived in Scotland for the grand opening of Trump International Golf Links, Scotland- 
 Gotta hand it to  she loved Doral from the time we looked at it. The Trump-Doral will be an Icon. #sayfie #newsmax
 When true golfers see what I do at Doral it will be the hottest club in the country. #sayfie #newsmax
 A Great 4th of July! America a great country who's brightest days, with wise leadership, lie ahead.
 Hope and Change? Job numbers down. Time for 
 Keep an eye on Anthony Weiner. Weasels are hard to get rid of.
 As I anticipated, Justice Roberts made the cover of Time Magazine etc. The liberal media now loves him-- he should be ashamed.
 Job numbers today--- terrible! So what else is new?
 I wonder what Pres. George W. Bush has to say about Robert's Obama Care ruling. 
 John Roberts arrived in Malta yesterday. Maybe we will get lucky and he will stay there.
 When will Pakistan apologize to us for providing safe sanctuary to Osama Bin Laden for 6 years?! Some "ally."
 Welcome to  America - in June U.S. manufacturing shrank, the first time in 3 years  No sector is safe.
 Today  is in Ohio on a bus tour. Tomorrow Pennsylvania. How about actually running the country?
 May jobless numbers have been readjusted to 8.2%.  economy is a disaster  New numbers tomorrow.
 Done -  believes Obama Care is a tax  Enough with the pundit hysteria.
 Congrats to Alec Baldwin, his new wife will be great for him and a gem.
 I don't care what people say, I like Tom Cruise. He works his ass off and never ever quits. He's one of the few true movie stars.
  We love you and are proud of you. Your new show will be a smash!
 Toledo Blade reports Ohio-made Jeep Wranglers are among the US vehicles targeted by China and subject of US complaint. 
 My  interview discussing Roberts,  campaign and  BarackObama's failing negotiations with Iran 
 Bob Diamond’s forced resignation from Barclay’s Bank is a really big deal in business. Nobody thought such a thing could happen.
 Bob Schieffer of Face The Nation is doing well in the ratings--- I like him because he treated me very fairly.
 The right move-- will visit  this summer and meet with   
 Welcome to  America - 8.74 million workers on 'Federal Disability"  Where are the jobs?!
 According to  the public is still confused on the ObamaCare ruling  So is Roberts!
 Via  ObamaCare "is a tax"   gave the largest tax increase in history on the middle class. Shameful!
 Hypocrite! in '06  called private equity "the best opportunity for long-term economic vitality" 
 Great!  campaign is doing a superb job making inroads with the Evangelical Community  via 
 Just as I predicted,  is preparing a possible attack on Iran right before November. 
 I wonder why  didn't mention Roberts' BS ObamaCare ruling in his weekly radio address. #T-A-X 
 Wow--such sacrfices for his re-election.  will not vacation in Martha's Vineyard this summer. 
 Degenerate former Congressman Anthony Weiner is trying to make a comeback. He is a sick & perverted man that New York does not want or need.
 Justice Roberts changed his vote in order to make the media happy. He was intimidated by the press.
 Con Ed has won its suit against the Ground Zero Mosque developers  The mosque is never going up.
 Tomorrow we celebrate Independence Day, America's 236th birthday. Here is America's actual birth certificate 
 Justice John Roberts' stupid and unreasoned decision on ObamaCare is having a positive impact on the  (cont) 
 Bob Diamond getting the boot at Barclay's is a really big deal. In business, no one thought this could have happened.
 I believe  made a deal with the Saudis to increase oil production until after the election. Then (cont) 
 My  interview discussing CJ Roberts' stupidity, J Kennedy's wisdom, GOP coalescing & why the mandate (cont) 
 Great poll numbers for  just out--he is leading substantially in swing states.
 The 'brunt' of ObamaCare will be shouldered by folks making under $120K 
 Is it legal for  to make campaign donor calls from Air Force One?  Obama is always fundraising on our dime.
 Why is  continuing to lie?  has found that  did not ship jobs overseas 
 Happy to have just passed 1.3M Twitter followers. Love communicating with everyone daily.
 David Wright of the NY Mets should have been on the 1st Team All Stars. He's having a great year.
 Don't believe  whining--Pro-Romney SuperPAC spending is on par with Pro-Obama SuperPAC 
 Dangerous--The USC ObamaCare ruling means the government can now tax you for inactivity.
 China court: Apple pays $60M to settle iPad case. China is getting away with murder. 
 WRONG: A China court ordered  to pay $60M to a Chinese company that registered iPad before  
 My  interview discussing ObamaCare, the Romney-Trump fundraiser & my plans for Jones Beach 
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM. Tune in!
 Interesting -- studies show that wind farms have a warming effect on the climate
 Friends of mine who are driving Cadillacs--it is becoming a very hot car--are raving about what a great job  has done.
 ObamaCare has 21 tax hikes  There's now only one solution--defeat  this November! #GOMITT
 Great news--here comes the Tea Party!  has received 42k donations online & raised over $4.2 million since the ObamaCare decision.
 Justice Kennedy should be proud of himself for sticking to his principles, in light of Justice Roberts' bullshit!
 Interesting that Roberts said it was a tax in order to come out with his good public relations decision when (cont) 
 Had a great time with  last night. He is focused and ready for the battle ahead. Lots of money was raised.
 It seems that Justice Scalia originally wrote the majority on ObamaCare and Roberts then switched his position. 
 Justice Roberts did the Republican Party and  a great favor. He essentially said ObamaCare is a tax, (cont) 
 Justice Roberts turned on his principles with absolutely irrational reasoning in order to get loving press from (cont) 
 Wind Farms are not only disgusting to look at but also cause tremendous damage to their local ecosystems. 
 Even the US Democrat campaign chair is now telling candidates to avoid the DNC convention  Good advice!
 Obamacare will bankrupt our country and lead to socialized medicine. We must all focus now on electing  this November.
 A list from  "Top 10 Most Expensive Obamacare Taxes and Fees" 
 Just as I predicted, the oral arguments in the USC were not indicative of how the Court would rule. Many 'analysts' look like idiots today.
 The Supreme Court ruled  constitutional & may have handed  a short term victory but (cont) 
 #FullRepeal: Stopping Obamacare is now up to the American people. We must elect  this November.
 Remember this--- told  in 09 that it is "not true" that the individual mandate is a tax 
 The USC made a terrible decision today. How can a requirement to buy private health insurance logically be a Government tax?!
 Wow, the Supreme Court passed  I guess  wanted to be a part of Georgetown society more than anyone knew.
 Preliminary talks have begun for next season's #CelebrityApprentice. As usual, we will have another great season.
 It is terrible that  did not appoint an independent counsel to investigate the national security leaks. No accountability.
 The Fed's actions these past 3 years could bring record high inflation in the near future. That would be (cont) 
 Who's the outsourcer?  campaign is using a travel company with outsourced jobs in China and India. 
 A "Lion's List" of Democrats are not attending  DNC Convention. The Democratic Party is in turmoil. 
 Unemployment has been over 8% for a record 40 straight months.  election will end the  downturn.
 Why are all the geniuses in Washington who heralded the "Arab Spring" never held responsible for their ridiculous predictions?
 Scary--now China's Development Bank is looking to buy U.S. homes and developments  They will own our country soon.
 Looking forward to the "Dine with Mitt and Donald" this Thursday. Can't wait to meet the lucky winner. 
 Welcome to the new Egypt Muslim Brotherhood representatives who won't take questions from Israeli journalists 
 Two more weeks until the July 10th opening- 
 Shock -  DNC Convention has a $27M deficit and events are starting to be canceled. 
 My  interview discussing simplifying the tax code, Congress' stalemate & the USC immigration decision 
 Outrageous-  has spent over $2.7B on implementing  since the oral arguments at SCOTUS 
 I am glad America is starting to get to know  the way I know him. A wonderful & decent family man (cont) 
 Another broken promise by   actually increases income inequality  It must be fully repealed!
 What a statesman!  made sure to quickly call the Muslim Brotherhood victor to congratulate him on (cont) 
 The Islamists have won. Just as I predicted, the Muslim Brotherhood has taken over Egypt.  never should have abandoned Mubarek.
 My  interview re: Muslim Brotherhood taking over Egypt, our vast natural gas resources & US tax system 
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM
 An insightful article on  
 Wind Power is proving to be very costly and unsightly.
 Sometimes there is justice. A Chinese military newspaper was hacked. 
 Many Democrats up for reelection in 2012 are skipping the DNC convention in Charlotte  Smart politics!
 Watch the WH spokesman try to spin  rationale for using exec. priv. on Fast & Furious 
 The $9B that  spent in 'Stimulus' for Solar, Wind Projects created 910 total jobs, costing $9.8M each. 
 Moody's is out to make publicity. The bank downgrades from yesterday don't make up for  giving AAA (cont) 
 U.S. tuitions are completely out of control. In the last 4 years, the average price has gone up by 15%.  Unsustainable!
 Congrats to  on winning  championship.  is a tremendous owner & has done wonders for (cont) 
 Good messaging and staying on point.  called  "anti-investment, anti-business, anti-jobs" 
 Sad--just 16% of American parents think their children will be better off than them  We can do much better!
 A tragedy--the 4 week jobless claim average just hit a new 2012 high  It will only get worse unless something is done.
 Fast & Furious traces to  made a pre-Inaugural "Pledge" to Mexican Pres. Calderon to "take action" 
 The  campaign took in $39M in May but spent $44.6M. Sound familiar!
 The new  trailer is fantastic  Trump Tower stood in for Wayne Enterprises during filming.
 Fast & Furious directly resulted in the death of US Border Agent Brian Terry. Sad!
 Glad to hear  new book on  "The Amateur" is #1 on the  best-seller list 4 weeks in a row.
 Now China won't allow an American to leave the country over a debt dispute--and  won't comment. 
 Rape is a huge problem in the U.S. military. Over 19,000 rapes last year.
  I will be watching you on The View tomorrow.
 I look forward to playing golf with President  someday.
 The USC should be ruling any day now on  Hopefully we will get the right result.
 SHOCK -  people are sending paid political organizers to heckle at  events 
 CORRUPT--with the national security leaks and Fast & Furious, there are clearly at least two cover ups in  White House.
 Yesterday there was yet another massive intelligence leak by the  administration. 
 The Amateur! First  was caught bowing to the Saudi King but now the President of Mexico! 
 Now is the time to buy housing, before values have fully recovered. In 5 years, remember I told you so.
 . "Donald Trump" just hit 60 million hits. Maybe I should go into a new business.
 Congratulations to  on his new late night show! He will do really well. (It pays to win #CelebrityApprentice)
 Putin has no respect for our President --- really bad body language.
 Now the Chinese are planning a war game w/ the Iranians,Syrians & Russians along Syrian coast.  Laughing at 
 Congrats to Roger Clemens, he showed great courage. This case never should have been brought to trial. Andy Pettitte did the right thing.
 Now even  old professors are coming out in opposition to his re-election.  He has embarrassed them.
 My  interview re: Europe's financial mess, investing in Spain, Germany's economy and the future of the Euro 
 On Friday  said that China has better cities and airports than the US. Well what has  done about it the last 3 years?!
 Good-- promised "to do the opposite" of  on  this past weekend, the FFC Conference 
 Glad to hear that  Faith and Freedom Strategy Conference this past weekend in DC was a tremendous success.
 I don't mind that  plays a lot of golf. I just wish he used it productively to make deals with Congress!
 Russia's recent actions in Syria have proven  right.  offers Putin "flexibility."  will exert influence.
 Great  finals game last night.   are doing well--and so is Micky.
 Last Friday's immigration announcement by  is another short term solution to a larger problem. Obama can't execute on the Hill.
 Congratulations to  on winning the  #USOPEN this past weekend. His first Major. Well done!
 My  interview discussing  immigration policy,  China comments and 2012 election 
 If you missed it, my  interview sharing a Father's Day memory about my dad, Fred Trump 
 I have received many notes of thanks from people regarding my comments on vaccines and autism. The autism and (cont) 
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  at 7:30 AM. Tune in!
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM. Always interesting. Tune in!
 Win a dinner with  and me in New York this June 28th. It's selling like hotcakes! 
 The U.S. needs to protect our intelligence assets, especially in China. If the Chinese want to spy on us, then we need to return the favor.
 Today's announcement by  on immigration was done for reelection. He is using the office of the presidency as a campaign tool.
 Now is the time for the  to be united with the mission of electing  this November. Stop with the public divisions.
 I wonder when we will be able to see  college and law school applications and transcripts. Why the long wait?
 What a tremendous speech by  yesterday on the economy in Ohio.
 Great basketball game last night. Congratulations to  owner  on the win.
 Great players in sports make the game fun to watch.  has continued to impress with another amazing season. Absolute professional.
 Failure--for all of  talk of "engaging the world," U.S. favorability has dropped around the world 
 Watch this video to see how bad wind turbines are for the environment- 
 Shocking--over 92% of France--who just elected a socialist for its new PM--want  re-elected 
 Today both  and  are giving speeches on their economic policies in Ohio. The choice is (cont) 
 Today is my birthday. My wish is for our country to be great and prosperous again.
 The one positive from the plunge in household wealth is that we are in a buyer's market. This is the time to buy!
 SCARY-$6T in debt and $1T annual budget deficits later,  is asking for more time to fix the economy 
 China's currency manipulation is one of our nation's greatest sovereign threats. The yuan has appreciated 40% against our dollar since 2005.
 The  healthcare plan post ObamaCare relies on consumer choices with more options  The perfect remedy!
 Thanks to  rejecting the Keystone XL pipeline, China has become Canada's biggest oil consumer. China is laughing at us!
 Once again,  tweets nonsense about  She needs to stop tweeting & start worrying about some of her many problems.
 Good news-- is now leading in North Carolina according to  The NC GOP is united after their (cont) 
 My  interview discussing  comments, a united 2012 GOP, #CelebApprentice & Trump#Miss Universe 
 Biden  Spends $1 Million Annually for Weekend Trips 
 The Euro, put in place to hurt the U.S., is done! -- will have less negative impact than most think.
 Good-- is suing the Federal Government so he can protect the voter rolls  Florida must be a legal election.
 Sad. has already exempted major oil importers on Iranian sanctions and is negotiating a waiver with China. 
 Scary--Americans private wealth fell 40% from 2007-2010  But  thinks the private economy is "doing fine."
 . is 100% right. The US Supreme Court should do "the right thing" & overturn ObamaCare or the country (cont) 
 Welcome to the new reality. Goldman Sachs just based their new Asia Pacific chairman not in Tokyo, but Beijing. 
 Don't believe the media stories. OPEC and the Saudis have not been doing us any favors recently with oil outputs. Oil should be $30/barrel.
 The  - " Eyes are on Northeast Pa. with gas development" 
 As one of Miamii's largest landowners, I am pulling for the  in the  finals. Lebron's time is now! 
 My  interview discussing Jamie Dimon, the Doral Miami purchase, OPEC's output &  Open 
 My  interview discussing  comments, attacks on  and  &  low ratings 
 Sadly, it took a hit & run auto accident to make us aware of who our Secretary of Commerce is--and such an important position!
 Don Jr. will present the Keynote Address in South Africa on Dec. 1st 
 Trump Tuesday-- tomorrow at 7:38 AM.
 I will be on  show tonight at 10PM ET on 
 Is another  credit downgrade coming?'Political and Fiscal' concerns give our S&P rating a negative outlook 
 The Justice Department's investigation into the national security leaks is not independent. This is a very grave situation.
 WASTE--HUD is spending $70M to teach grant recipients how to spend the money from their grants  Does it get any dumber?
 China has copied our military's F-22 Raptor design  We should offset their theft from our debt.
 Good sign-- is getting the same amount of union support nationally that  got in Wisconsin 
 . interview of me was the highest rated in  history. He is a great guy.
 Last Friday's gaffe by  claiming that the private sector "is doing fine" is illustrative.Everything to him revolves around gov't
 . and  need big help in the ratings- I can tell them where they are going wrong.
 With almost 1.3 million followers and rising really fast, everyone is asking me to critique things(and people). Finally, I will be a critic.
 . was robbed in his title fight on Saturday night. No wonder boxing is dying. Bring back the 15 round fights.
 Today I closed on my historic purchase of the Doral in Miami.  I am very excited about what (cont) 
 My  interview discussing  gaffe, closing on #Doral today and  Bain record 
 Trump Tuesday-- tomorrow at 7:38 AM. Be sure to tune in!
 Miss Florida was great in her denial of Miss Pennsylvania's phoney statements. She blows Miss Pennsylvania away- a different league .
 Thanks to  a great woman, for her wonderful defense of the Miss USA pageant.
 Accounting firm Ernst & Young and the celebrity judges are insulted by Miss Pennsylvania's made up PR.
 Miss Pennsylvania is just looking for free publicity at the expense of the real winner of Miss USA Olivia Culpo.
 Beautiful  in  tomorrow as Audrey Hepburn in front of Tiffany's.
 Too bad I'll Have Another out of Belmont Stakes- interest now way down.
 Doral Resort closing scheduled for Monday morning. Will soon be finest in the country. Miami is amazing. 
 Typical-- Press Secretary deflects any criticism of Obama's constant celebrity visits by attacking me. My great honor.
 Scary--the CBO esimated that US publicly held debt amounts to over 70%. China is buying our country up.
 . writes for the  No wonder our country is going to hell.
 Now  is telling  how to control his own assets.  Obama is consumed by class warfare.
 This is a tragedy. The real unemployment rate is 14.8% with over 23.2 million unemployed Americans. We can do much better.
 Great news.  raised over $76.8M in May and now has over $107M cash on hand with the RNC. His campaign (cont) 
 The Fed reported that companies are not sitting on as much cash as first believed.  The economy is on a slowdown.
 . gave a very weak & pathetic interview of Ms. Pennsylvania. Didn't mention judges, Ernst & Young, or other factors. Very sad.
 My  interview discussing my decision to sue Sheena Monnin and how she is a disgruntled loser  
 I'm on  this Monday at 7:30 AM. Tune in!
 Small businesses will have an ally in the White House with  Mitt gave a great interview yesterday 
 Take a tour of this amazing penthouse in Trump Park Avenue.... 
 Shock--even more  solar corruption.  chief of staff's firm got biggest DOE loan. 
 Greece's financial calamity should serve as a warning.  massive deficit spending is unsustainable.
 How foolish did  look yesterday trying to rationalize why  accepts donations from Bain? 
 It's good to see that  is protecting the sanctity of this November's elections, Voter fraud must be broken.
 While I own properties across the world I am very excited about my new acquisition of  in Miami. (cont) 
 . and I are working out a great dinner for someone- I hope it's you! 
 Why is  spending millions to try and hide his records? He is the least transparent President--ever--and he ran on transparency.
 The results are in. I killed Wolf Blitzer in our debate. I like Wolf but he went for an ambush! #wolfblitzercnn
 China's new AND ADVANCED currency manipulation is killing the U.S. Help!
 The Miss USA Pageant #MissUSA was a big ratings hit for  won the evening. Thank you, Donald.
 . was very nice to me, as I am to him, on the Piers Morgan Show (CNN). He is loyal to his friends. 
 Is Roger Simon  ever right about anything? Now he's attacking  in defense of (cont) 
 . on  tonight at 7PM EST. Tune in!
 Obama was very disloyal to Wisconsin Democrats.  never showed up to help them even though he (cont) 
 Congratulations to  of Wisconsin--a great victory. A smart and tough guy. Great going.
 It was  who promised "if you like your plan, you can keep your plan." Now ObamaCare is causing (cont) 
 China's best friend  wants to cut the US fleet down to 230 ships, the lowest level since WWI. 
 While  spends recklessly on domestic projects, he is hollowing out our military with over $487B in cuts 
 What a foolish statement by  - he said that a  VP pick would 'insult' Hispanics 
 We have all been following the Wisconsin recall election.  victory tonight will be well-earned. A Governor who gets results.
 Trump Vineyard Estates is a breathtaking location to hold special events for all occasions. Watch the video for a look- 
 Just cancelled my subscription to  Boring newspaper with no mojo--must be losing a fortune. Founder (cont) 
 My  interview. 
 Now that China's own economy is slowing  watch how they start doing even bigger numbers in (cont) 
 In some ways it is sad. We all wanted  to succeed. It's not worked out that way.
 The real war on women. Under  766,000 more women are unemployed from when he took office 
 Welcome to the new reality-- be careful. Retirement ages will be pushed to 80 due to the incompetence of our leaders. 
 I had a wonderful meeting with Likud Deputy Speaker of The Knesset  this past Friday in Trump Tower  #Israel
 The North Carolina #GOPConvention was a great time. I loved meeting everyone. Let's carry it to victory in November.
 My  interview discussing #MissUSA Olivia Culpo, the job numbers & the waste of the Obama stimulus 
 Congratulations to Miss Rhode Island on winning the Miss USA contest. She did an amazing job.
 TRUMP TUESDAY  tomorrow at 7:30 am Tune in!
 I had fun appearing in the video for Carly Rae Jepsen's #CallMeMaybe for #MissUSA 2012- 
 Watch #MissUSA 2012 live tonight on  at 9PM EST!
 I had a fun time doing the #CallMeMaybe video featuring  the  contestants,  and  
 I am in Las Vegas for the  2012 pageant. Watch live tonight on  at 9PM ET. 
 The  2012 contestants standing outside of Trump Tower in New York City-   2012 tomorrow at 9PM ET NBC.
 The stock market is having a horrendous day- bad employment numbers.
 Almost all reporters falsely report that I had a "bad time" at last year's White House Correspondents' Dinner. (cont) 
 Now the  campaign is fundraising off of me. I should get a tax rebate! 
 Waste! The CBO now estimates that  stimulus cost $831B and a ridicuous $4.1M per job created 
 What a foolish move by  to speak in Boston yesterday! Completely outmaneuvered by the  campaign.
 Now  is telling donors he will need to 'revisit' healthcare in his 2nd term 
 Pres. Bill Clinton, 5.31.12: " had a sterling business career."
 Tune in Sunday June 3 to NBC at 9pm ET for the 2012 Miss USA competition, coming from Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas
 Over $1T in annual deficit spending and adding over $6T to the debt for what? May jobless numbers are horrendous. The great Obama recovery.
  interview on  discussing her beautiful jewelry line,my son Barron and the 2012 campaign 
 The  2012 contestants pose for a picture with me at Trump Tower in New York City- 
 Bay Bridge in California made in China for $1.8 billion. $300 million in cost overruns. Are we stupid?
 See you tonight in North Carolina. Making keynote for the Republican party- will be fun.
 Thank you to the  for a very nice story- 
 Unemployment has risen today and some other very bad news has just been reported- the stock market is way down.
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM...be sure to tune in.
 US job cuts jumped 53% in May from April  This is the Obama recovery?
 Pathetic! Since  is going to win the recall,  is trying to disown the endorsement of Tom Barrett 
 Q1 GDP has just been revised down to 1.9%  The economy is in deep trouble.
 Does anyone believe that  did not fully write or review the 1991 publisher booklet?
 When will  realize he is on a fool's errand trying to defend  ineptitude?
 Dine with The Donald and Mitt 
 Looking forward to meeting everyone at the North Carolina GOP this Friday where I will be the keynote speaker at the dinner. #GOP
 China and Saudi Arabia recently struck a deal which is "the largest expansion by any oil company in the world" (cont) 
 Commodity prices are beginning to drop as a result of the Euro crisis 
 So  claims that  birth certificate evokes 'controversy'  Where (cont) 
 It was an honor to be with  the night he clinched the nomination. He will defeat  and be a tremendous POTUS.
 How ironic that  campaign would call me a charlatan. Have they looked at their boss's record?
 The  fundraiser last night was a tremendous success.
 George Will was critical of  throughout the primary. Maybe it is because his wife was turned down for (cont) 
 George Will was pushing for  for the GOP nomination in December...said he was going to win. (cont) 
 The  campaign keeps highlighting a web video of John McCain being nice & respectful. I'll bet John (cont) 
 My  interview discussing my  fundraiser in Trump Int'l Hotel Las Vegas and the state of the (cont) 
 My  interview with  where I discuss  'birth certificate' and why  has low ratings 
 Scary--America would have had to pay all its GDP to the government to cover  real 2011 budget deficit 
 Now Chinese agents are smuggling our military weapons through rogue US soldiers  China loves to cheat!
 Everybody is raving about the Trump Home Mattress by  If you are looking for a mattress, go buy (cont) 
 In his own words,  "was born in Kenya, and raised in Indonesia and Hawaii." This statement was made, (cont) 
 Rush is right.  and I have both created more jobs than  fact, far more jobs!
 What could be better than dinner with  and me? 
 I want to see  college records to see how he listed his place of birth in the application.
 It's amazing how celebrities such as  can say horrible untrue things about Republican politicians and it's (cont) 
 Reverend Wright was dumped like a dog by  can't be feeling too good.
 Perhaps  biggest shortcoming as President is he failed to unite the country.
 Pres  expects  to play nice like  not going to happen & the result is going to be much different.
 Australia is luring US workers to mine the Outback with fast-track visas. Australia's unemployment is 4.9% and (cont) 
 The greatest commodity to own is land. It is finite. God is not making any more of it.
 So  will attack  career at Bain Capital but won't return donations from Bain executives 
 Unsustainable-  has increased total federal budget outlays by over 24% during his term  He loves debt.
 Now  has decided there are 5 million Palestinian refugees  He always goes against  interest.
 China is now criticizing the US human rights record  They have zero credibility on the issue. Can you believe this?
 Just 2 years ago  celebrated Solyndra  No party $550 million & a total loss of $ later
 In '08,  said that Bush adding $4T to the debt was unpatriotic.   has already added $6T.
 The 2012  contestants recently visited Trump Tower. Watch the video- 
 The second part of my  interview discussing the GOP convention, VP choices, Facebook and the Euro 
 My  interview discussing my fundraiser with  starting my own PAC and real unemployment, 
 I am very excited about hosting  today for a fundraiser. Looking forward to seeing  and many other friends.
 The full episode  which I guest hosted last Friday  I had a fantastic time.
 George Will totally “bombed” at The Mar-a-Lago Club. I was there to watch. He was embarrassed and no longer likes Donald Trump.
 Vanity Fair newsstand sales continue to fall. How much longer can it last? The clock is ticking.
 Losers such as George Will and  use me to get publicity for themselves. They are strictly third rate.
 . is practically begging  to disavow the place of birth movement, he is afraid of it and (cont) 
 George Will may be the dumbest(and most overrated) political commentator of all time. If the Republicans listen to him, they will lose.
 HYPOCRITE! Long before  called the Tea Party 'teabaggers' he dressed as a revolutionary in a Hyde Park rally 
 Dine With The Donald and Mitt: 
 Pictures of  and me from the Men In Black III premiere in New York City  We loved the movie!
 Why are armed drones being released over our homeland by the Government?  Seems excessive.
 Egypt is going the exact opposite of what it was. They will soon be very strongly against Israel. Thanks, President Obama. 
 My  interview discussing OPEC, US gas resources,  and running a campaign against  
 Josh Brolin, a friend of mine, was terrific in "Men in Black." Congrats!
 Cadillac has made amazing strides in the beauty and quality of their cars. Great management team--congratulations! 
 Lolo Jones, our beautiful Olympic athlete, wants to remain a virgin until she gets married--she is great. 
 What a series the   is turning out to be! Tonight's game should be another close one.
 ObamaCare's tax credit is underperforming by over 95% creating an even bigger cost to the debt  It must be repealed!
 Interesting. 1981 transfer class to Columbia "declined" in "quality" according to the Columbia Spectator 
 Welcome to Twitter, 
 Capitalism doesn't guarantee success, only a chance to succeed. The community organizer  doesn't (cont) 
 The storied success of Bain in private entrepreneurship and equity is one reason  will be a great POTUS.
 Disaster! The  tax hikes set for 2013 are going "to throw us back into a recession" according to the CBO 
 A bite from last night's  interview discussing Rev. Wright's Ed Klein interview and the 2012 campaign 
 A segment from last night's  interview discussing  and fighting fire with fire in a campaign 
 The  administration is pressuring contractors to fix job loss estimates from environmental regulations 
 I'll be on Piers Morgan Tonight this evening, 9 pm on CNN. Be sure to tune in. 
 I wonder if  ever applied to Occidental, Columbia or Harvard as a foreign student. When can we see (cont) 
 The Republicans should use everything against  as  is going to use everything (cont) 
 China is now given preference to buy US debt by going directly to Treasury. I don't believe  knows that he selling us out.
 Glad to see that Sacha Baron Cohen's new movie is not only a dud but not too good at the box office. He is talentless. 
 Hmmm...can you imagine me speaking at the RNC Convention in Tampa?  That's a speech everyone would watch.
 I am a registered Republican.  With  as the nominee, we can defeat 
 My  interview discussing why I don't own Facebook stock and running a tough campaign against  
 Who would you like to see on next season of #CelebrityApprentice? Let us know- everyone wants to be on it.
 In today's #trumpvlog I talk about how well Will Smith handled the situation with the reporter- 
 I loved Walter Cronkite, one of the all time greats. He couldn't stand Dan Rather--I agree with Walter. 
 President Obama's literary agent (in 1991) promoted a book about "the first African-American president of the (cont) 
 Rapper  song, "Donald Trump", now has 57 million hits--- I created another star--- where's my cut?
 Rev. Wright called  on tape, a liar. Why isn't this being looked into? It would be a great commercial for the republicans.
 Mr. Pesident,  you cannot attack free enterprise and expect to have a healthy economy!
 Will Smith did a great job by smacking the guy "reporter" who kissed him on the lips at a red carpet event. (cont) 
 By releasing Chen, China showed that its political situation is becoming increasingly unstable to domestic (cont) 
 #TrumpTuesday I'll be on  tomorrow at 7:30 am. Tune in!
 America has lost its AAA rating and gained over $6T in debt under  and now he wants to raise the debt ceiling--SCARY!
 Congratulations to  of the #Mets. What a great season he is having--batting over 400 and clutch hitting. Also, a fantastic guy.
 Sahar Biniaz is beautiful. She will make Canada proud in the international  competition this December.
 Congratulations to  on winning Miss Congeniality in the  pageant this past (cont) 
 The  must re-negotiate  contract. He is not the same player without drugs.
 David Feherty of  will interview me tonight at 10 pm, ET. Tune in--it will be fun.
 All indications show that  is building a strong campaign. His fundraising is ready to outpace (cont) 
 I look forward to watching  He us a very sharp guy who will have a tremendous career.
 This season of #CelebrityApprentice raised over $2M for charity.  led the pack. He did a great (cont) 
 Last night's live season finale of #CelebrityApprentice was another massive ratings success. Thank you to our (cont) 
 My  interview discussing  #CelebrityApprentice win, 2012 political ads and the G8 
 Watch the boardroom scene of #CelebrityApprentice with  and  where  is HIRED 
 #CelebrityApprentice Who will win?  Find out tonight- live Season Finale at 9PM ET on NBC.
 Time Warner Cable went out on 5th Avenue for 2 plus days. They are a disaster. I think I'm going to switch.
 And I'll be visiting the TODAY Show on Monday as well 
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM
 Sure-- literary agent claims the 1991 booklet was a 'mistake'  Pretty convenient.
 Let's take a closer look at that birth certificate.  was described in 2003 as being "born in Kenya." 
 Reckless! Why is  wasting over $70 Billion on 'climate change activities?' Will he ever learn? 
 The  &  #CelebrityApprentice live finale is going to shock you! MUST SEE TV...9 pm Sunday on NBC
 The final two-  &  in the lobby of Trump Tower-  #CelebrityApprentice
 Sacha Baron Cohen's new movie "The Dictator" is a complete dud. Lots of bad reviews. Besides, he should (cont) 
 Eddie Malloy, Construction Union Leader, tough as hell but fair, an amazing guy. Went to his funeral this (cont) 
 John Travolta got lucky. These characters that are accusing him of whatever just hired  a full (cont) 
 Seems hard to believe that  could be worth that much--be careful if you invest. And Mark Zuckerberg--get a pre-nup.
 Donna Summer performed for me many times--she was great and will be missed. 
 Mitt Romney matches sitting President in fundraising for April--not an easy thing to do. Bad news for (cont) 
 Under Mayor  and Police Commissioner  Kelly all violent crime in NYC is down dramatically. That's leadership.
 WaPo attack on alleged high school incidents by  is a hit job to me. Where are  high school and college records?
  Mark Zuckerberg is clearly a brilliant guy. My advice? Get a pre-nup!  
 Here's what I told  on  when it comes to singer  inappropriate attacks on  
 SHOCK! While attacking  private equity experience,  raises $2M from private equity bankers 
 Wrong! Under  watch,  is not being invited to NATO summit in Chicago this month 
 Glad to see that Jamie Dimon passed yesterday's shareholder vote. The JP Morgan stock holders understand that a good CEO is worth keeping.
 The final two-  and  visited yesterday- 
 Under  the Iranian nuclear program has rapidly grown. 
 We should not bail out any of the European countries or banks.
 Why the nation's debt keeps growing - a Dept of Agriculture employee made over $242K with a $63K bonus  Ridiculous.
 A great ad from  showing "A Few of the 23 Million" unemployed who need economic change  Take it to him Mitt!
 Why won't  repeal the Defense of Marriage Act if he supports gay marriage?  He is gaming the issue.
 According to   has a 12 point advantage over  on the economy  Look for it to grow.
 Congratulations to my friend  on being named to the "Hall of Famous Missourians." Rush is a great guy & a great character.
 My  interview discussing Jamie Dimon, banking regulations and Mark Zuckerberg's prenuptial 
 My  interview discussing  misleading political ad,  response and  &  
 I hope Mark Zuckerberg signs a prenup with his current girlfriend- perhaps soon to be wife. Otherwise, she can walk away with 9 billion.
 Worired that the USC will strike down ObamaCare,  is trying to implement his debacle in public schools 
 More than $500 million designated for Iraqi Army disappeared. Where is it? Our sad sad country--what have we come to?
 Mitt Romney gave a masterful speech this weekend at Liberty University with a wonderful introduction by Mark DeMoss. Well done. 
 Now China is threatening our allies who share defense pacts with us, the latest is the Philippines  Very aggressive
 Did  try to bribe Rev. Wright with $150K?  I am sure the media will be all over this.
 Even  own doctor thinks ObamaCare will be a failutre due to runaway costs  It must be repealed.
 Great quote from the late Steve Jobs: "Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower."
 China, Japan and South Korea agreed to have free trade negotiations--notice they don't ask the U.S. to join in (cont) 
 Ed Klein wrote a book on the President, "The Amateur." Great book, excellent reading! 
 My interview with Eagle Daily Investor: "Anti-Business Government Policies Hurt Investor, Trump Warns" 
 Facebook billionaire gives up his U.S. citizenship in order to save taxes. I guess 3.8 billion isn't enough for (cont) 
 VOTE 4  &  #DWTS #01 tonight! 2 wks to the top! 1-800-868-3401 VOTE ONLINE at: 
 My  interview discussing JP Morgan Chase, bank lending, student loans &  firing last night 
 U.S. looks like they will quit in effort to train Iraq police units. "Key mission in disarray--costly project (cont) 
 Very resource rich Canada, our neighbor, is looking to China for its growth. Just another sad commentary on the U.S. 
 Miss Universe,  will be on the live  finale this Sunday at 9 pm. Everyone is asking for her. 
  lost his first game--I used to be a fan of his until he ratted out his best friend,  
 Great job by the NY Rangers and the NJ Devils.  
 I'll be on  tomorrow at 7:30 a.m. #TrumpTuesday
 As I stated long ago,  will break away from the euro and go back to its own currency. They should never (cont) 
 Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase had a bad week, but will fully recover. He is a good guy and a great banker.
 The TIME Magazine cover showing late age breast feeding is disgusting--sad what TIME did to get noticed. 
 Howard Stern will do a great job on  He's very smart and really gets what talent is. 
  should stop with the bad plastic surgery and nasty statements about good people running for office. I (cont) 
  ratted out his best friend  in a ridiculous trial. Not nice! Who is rooting for Andy P?
 Ugly industrial wind turbines are ruining the beauty of parts of the country--and have inefficient unreliable energy to boot.
 Terrible. Wind farms are provided permits by the US government, which causes the "programmatic" killing of bald eagles.
 Good news. Voters give  the edge over  on handling the economy according to  
 If the press can report stories from  dorm years then why can't it find  college and law school transcripts?
 Procter and Gamble is relocating its beauty headquarters from Cincinnati to Asia--what are we doing?!
 The April jobs report is terrible. If the labor forces didn't shrink under  then real unemployment (cont) 
 Selective memory -  says that he "forgets" the recession  Maybe that's why he is forgetting to create jobs.
 Watch Celebrity Apprentice on Sunday at 9 pm on NBC--we're winding up for a terrific finale. What a season! 
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 a.m. Always a great time.
 In the UK, taxpayers are wasting £24 million on wind farms that don't even operate.  They (cont) 
 Who's the flip flopper?  has never flip flopped on gay marriage.
 Our trade deficit continues to rise at record rates  The US manufacturing sector is being (cont) 
  Barclay, a friend of mine & a wonderful guy, didn't mean to be so nasty to  He was just (cont) 
 Congratulations to   on forming his new unity government. A major political success for the Jewish State of Israel.
 Welcome to the new reality.  is now letting China buy US banks  The US government is selling us out.
 . attacked  She is an average talent who is out of touch with reality. Like  O'Donnell, a total loser!
 The polling numbers show a close race.  needs all of our support.
 Georgetown should not host  for the graduation ceremony. Her policies abuse Catholics.
 Gas prices are still too high. We really need to pressure OPEC to lower the price of oil.
 Joe Biden called America "the Problem" vis a vis Iran   He never wastes an opportunity to say something stupid.
 My  interview discussing the economy, unemployment numbers, China, Charles Barkley,France and the election 
 My  interview discussing the Republic of Georgia, taxes, the fledgling economy and Facebook 
 My son Don will be giving the Keynote Address at The Investment Show in Sandton, South Africa on Dec. 1. He's an (cont) 
 2011 #CelebrityApprentice winner  and  interviewed the final four in this week's episode- 
 VOTE 4  & derekhough#01 tonight! She's doing a great job on Dancing with the Stars #DWTS (& a good person). 1-800-868-3401
 V.P.....really! 
 What's the primary ingredient for success? Passion. You have to love what you're doing or you won't get too far.
 Still a buyer's market. Home prices are dropping, mortgages are low. Now is the time to take advantage for your gain. 
 We must keep the pressure on  administration to make sure Chen comes to the US. It would be a tragedy to abandon him in China.
 No wonder Afghanistan is a mess!  is releasing high level insurgents in exchange for pledges of peace. 
 I had a great time doing press interviews with  and  earlier today- 
 Our economy is at a standstill. Some are even predicting a possible double dip. We need to elect  in November.
 The election result in France is very disappointing. The Europeans have to embrace austerity in order for their economy to fully recover.
 Glad to hear Mariano Rivera is going to make a comeback in 2013. He is a true sportsman and a great competitor. 
 The 9/11 trials at Gitmo over the weekend were a disaster. Can you imagine how much worse it would be if  tried them in NYC?
 Watch ET tonight to find out what my beautiful wife will be wearing at the Met Gala! 
 My  interview discussing the 9/11 Trials at Gitmo,  the job numbers and  
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM, don't miss it!
 Looks like my work here is done, bringing a close to the first ever #NBC #SweepsTweet. Keep watching  every Sunday 9/8c.
 Firing  may have come as a surprise. She’s a strong player. But there are no losers at this late point. #sweepstweet
 #CelebrityApprentice Listening to the advice from  and  adds another insight into the Final 4. #sweepstweet
 #sweepstweet  I very much rely on my own ‘take’ of the situation and people involved. My instincts (cont) 
 #SweepsTweet  might get some use out of the Chi Touch digital hairdryer. Not the same for 
 Remember the huge amount of money raised by  and company… #sweepstweet
 I have a feeling the emphasis by  and  will be on the charities and the money raised. (cont) 
 #CelebrityApprentice It’s good to have Jack back too with  He’s become a star. #sweepstweet
 #sweepstweet  and  were on #CelebrityApprentice—and they’re back!
 #sweepstweet Teresa seems to underestimate the power of observance—that of the client as well as her team- but she’s a wonderful person
 #CelebrityApprentice Boardrooms—can anything be more intense? #sweepstweet
 #sweepstweet  definitely fell under  negotiation skills—an important business tool.
 #sweepstweet  wins $100,000 for her charity and that’s a nice gift.
 #sweepstweet  and  have the eyes and ears for total surveillance- I wonder where they got that from?
 #CelebrityApprentice  “trying to be invisible”? No way that’s going to happen. #sweepstweet
 #CelebrityApprentice Could this ad campaign result in Mad Men & Mad Women? #sweepstweet
 Product placement is a definite prerequisite. #sweepstweet
 How will the client react? They’ve got both Elle Magazine and Chi to please. #sweepstweet
 Aubrey has a lot of self confidence—but will it be warranted? #sweepstweet
 I’m not sure about  as Project Manager.  can be formidable. But let’s see what happens #sweepstweet
 Good move by Aubrey to be the red-headed model they didn’t have. #sweepstweet
 The models are looking good… different types, all beautiful. #sweepstweet
 It’s clear to me that  needs some lessons in negotiation #sweepstweet
 #sweepstweet   I knew he could sing but I didn’t know he could be so tough and so smart. (cont) 
 Could be a fight over red-heads with  could be good. #sweepstweet
 #SweepsTweet  As the show continues to evolve, that could happen. The format we have now has (cont) 
 #SweepsTweet  I’d like to be remembered as someone who cared about his family and who contributed to (cont) 
 Frank Bennack, the head of Hearst, is a great guy and amazing leader. #SweepsTweet
 We have a Hearst Tower in New York and Hearst Castle in CA—both are worth seeing.
 I think  may know she could be  next target #SweepsTweet
 The Final Five—this has been a fight—and I think the fight will continue… #SweepsTweet
 Thanks for the welcome  Now it’s my turn to #SweepsTweet along with 
 I will be live tweeting during tonight's #CelebrityApprentice 9 PM ET 
 This Sunday's  will shock you! Big Development...Be sure to tune in on  this Sunday at 9PM EST!
 In the 1920's people were worried about global cooling--it never happened. Now it's global warming. Give me a break!
 According to  the War on Terror is over  but global warming is a national (cont) 
 With today's struggling job numbers, it is clear that there is one choice this November.  can turn the economy around.
 Welcome to the  recovery--the labor force participation rate is at a NEW 30 year low of 64.3% 
 The new unemployment numbers are terrible. 522,000 more people are out of the labor force to 88,419,000. 
 Mariano Rivera, Yankee pitcher, is the greatest ever. Get well fast.
 Derek Jeter is playing phenomenal baseball. He is a total winner--and also a great guy. 
 Celebrity Apprentice will have some big surprises this week--Sunday night on NBC at 9 pm 
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM...
 Photo from yesterday's USGA announcement that Trump National Golf Club Bedminster will host the 2017 U.S. Women's Open- 
 Fracking will lead to American energy independence. With price of natural gas continuing to drop, we can be at a tremendous advantage.
 Congratulations to the  on taking a 2-1 lead over the  Great game last night!
 We will never cut spending until we actually work off of a budget. The Democrats haven't passed one in over 3 years. What a joke.
 Now  is praising China's "cooperation" in negotiations over Chen Guangcheng  This is a sad episode for us.
 The rolling average of jobless claims is the highest in 5 months  ObamaCare continues to slow growth and cost jobs.
 WRONG! capitulated to China by releasing Chen Guangcheng out of the US Embassy  China really has our number
 Snowboarder/Skateboarder  stopped by to visit this week.... 
 When will  release his college and law school transcripts? 
 My friend Ronald Kessler explains in  that Secret Service problems are much bigger than prostitutes 
 Orders for U.S. factory goods in March record biggest decline in 3 years  China is eroding the US manufacturing sector.
 The new Dark Knight Rises Trailer is great  The movie filmed scenes in Trump Tower last October.
 Editorial by  in the "DailyCaller: "Defending Innovation in America" 
 My interview with  discussing  #WHCD and my endorsement of  
 America's debt crisis is our country's greatest challenge. Spending must be curbed for our long term fiscal future.
 Bad move- released $147M in aid to the Palestinians  That money is going to Hamas.
 The EPA official who wants to crucify gas companies resigned  Good- but his attitude is endemic in the EPA
  is a superb businessman and a world class CEO.He has built a tremendous empire and is certainly "fit" to run his corporation.
 My  interview discussing  #WHCD, my Scotland property &  using Bin Laden's death 
 My  interview discussing  #WHCD, lowering tax rates, Republic of Georgia & (cont) 
 Here’s a great video of the official launch of my new fragrance #Success  Herald Square 
 Guess which POTUS has held more fundraisers than the previous 5 combined?   is (cont) 
 The Federal Government is teaching citizens 'Financial Literacy' while it is running $16T in debt  Only in America!
 Chinese spies stole our F-35 Joint Strike Fighter design  We should offset the cost from our Chinese debt
 Barack Obama's delivery on Saturday night was excellent--cute mention of Trump--and I am flattered to be mentioned. 
 Good Morning America is thrilled  is working for the  means almost guaranteed success for 
 He  is bad, but  is worse--not only is he a "rat" but it turns out he stole much of the money for himself.
 Rosie O'Donnell should leave Lindsay Lohan alone-- has bigger problems than Lindsay. Lindsay's mother called my office for help
 My  interview where I discuss fixing the economy, killing Bin Laden, the John Edwards trial and fair trade. 
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  7:30 AM EST. Always interesting.
 Be sure to tune in to another amazing episode of #CelebApprentice tonight on  at 9PM EST! 
 #SuccessByTrump Here’s a photo from my appearance at  Herald Square with  
 Wind turbines threaten the migration of birds  Where's the outcry?
 Claims for unemployment are at a 3 month high  Where's the  recovery?
 The Obama's Spain vacation cost taxpayers over $476K  They love to spend money.
 Be sure to tune in to another amazing episode of #CelebApprentice this Sunday on  at 9PM EST! This Sunday's (cont) 
 The EPA is caught saying that their "philosophy is to crucify oil companies"  That will sure lower the price of gas.
 Admiral McRaven had full operational control of the Bin Laden mission   gave vague directions.
 I have never been a fan of John Edwards but it is time for the gov't to focus on more important things. 
 I wonder why  is now spending $8B to postpone Obamacare's Medicare Cuts until after the election? 
 Standing on what will be the greatest golf course in the world. Opens July 10th. 
 The economy is expected to slow down once again at the end of the year  The price of gas has to be lowered.
 Still a buyer's market. Residential home sales fall 7.1% in March.  Now is the time to buy property.
 He  believes that the War on Terror is over  Who does he think won?
 Congratulations to  on Tuesday night's sweep. He also delivered a 'Killer Speech' 
 Demand by China continues to raise the price of oil  We must become energy independent through our vast resources.
 Majority of Independents want Obamacare overturned  The best way to do it is by voting out 
 Congratulations to the  on bringing the series home last night.
 Made in America?  argues that his long form birth certificate is irrelevant in court. 
 The Government spends 30% more than it admits   is out of control with his deficit spending.
 I am enjoying my travels across Europe but home is where the heart is. Looking forward to coming back to the family in New York very soon.
 American professors were in Tehran for an Occupy Wall Street Conference   diplomatic initiative?!?!
  just trashed the GOP and stood up for China on Sunday  I am surprised he didn't say it in Mandarin.
 69 Democrats voted in favor of the Keystone pipeline in the House this week  A major defeat for 
 Lucky to have been chosen for the purchase of the magnificent The Point Lake and Golf Club on Lake Norman in (cont) 
 Not only are wind farms disgusting looking, but even worse they are bad for people's health  (cont) 
 Via  "Trump begins renewables mission in Scotland" 
 Via  "Trump flies into ex-Soviet Georgia for tower project project" 
 Just left Istanbul, Turkey, yesterday where #TrumpTowers was just opened--magnificent!
 Today I'm in Aberdeen, Scotland, preparing for the July 10th opening of perhaps the world's greatest golf course 
 Recently opened  it's beautiful and here is a video of the ribbon cutting ceremony.. 
 A Dem Senator said ObamaCare "Cost  a lot of credibility as a leader"  Hopefuly also the presidency.
  can get people back to work.
 Tonight’s #CelebrityApprentice will continue to impress. Be sure to tune in tonight at 9PM ET  It will be amazing.
 My interview with  from the Olympics 100 Day Countdown in Times Square 
 A bad manager such as  will continually be plagued by scandals.  Leadership starts at the top.
 I am in Istanbul,Turkey. Just opened magnificent #TrumpTowers--- a big hit.
 #trumpvlog The song "Donald Trump" hits 54 million views.  Where's my money? 
 Dick Clark was a friend of mine, he lived in one of my buildings on East 61st Street. Everybody loved him. He will be missed.
 Don't be fooled. In 2008  promised immigration reform in his 1st yr of his 1st term. Now promising (cont) 
 In today's #trumpvlog  the Secret Service, and Dick Clark..... 
 RECKLESS!  has now increased the debt more than any other POTUS and the first 42 combined. 
  is right--this election is about jobs  But it is interesting that  (cont) 
 Ted Nugent was obviously using a figure of speech, unfortunate as it was. It just shows the anger people have towards 
  signed a $70B budget which cut $140M in indiv projects  Very impressive. Rick is doing a masterful job.
 Very proud to announce that Mar-a-Lago was awarded top Historic building in the state by the illustrious (cont) 
  has shown last week that he will campaign aggressively against  I am confident he can defeat 
 My  interview discussing the passing of my longtime friend Dick Clark.  A true TV legend who will be missed.
 Vanity Fair party at Tribeca Film Festival was a bust.
 I knew disgusting and unwanted porn star  was a sleazebag the first time I met him. Thank goodness he was revealed (so to speak).
 #CelebrityApprentice ranked #1 among ABC ,CBS, and NBC in all key demos from 10-11PM. It won the 10PM hour by a 53% margin in 18-49 rating.
 Be sure to stop by  Herald Square at 5:30pm today. I will officially be launching my new fragrance and (cont) 
 I will be at  Herald Square at 5:30 PM today for the launch of my new fragrance #Success. Come over and say hello!
 By  design, the middle class will be hit with record taxes under ObamaCare through inflation  REPEAL!
 Bad! Total foreign holdings of US debt continue to increase with China increasing its holding a 2nd straight month 
 Vanity Fair circulation down 20 percent. My third rate stalker should start looking for a new job.
 Obama's Secret Service catastrophe has openly revealed a great lack of respect for our President. If they (cont) 
 Who would you most like to see win #CelebrityApprentice?
 Gloria Allred is always talking about me. She needs publicity. She is by far a better PR agent than lawyer.
 Under  5 major banks now control 56% of economy from 43% in 2007  Another catastrophe is brewing.
 Yesterday was  favorite day of the year--he collects our taxes to redistribute.
 Join me and Miss Universe 2010 in welcoming the new #Success  Herald Square today at 5:30 pm in the men's (cont) 
 My  interview discussing broadening the tax base,  tax return & tweeting with  
 Our ally Canada is 'frustrated' by  radical anti-gas policies  BHO is forcing Canada to send gas to China.
 Enjoyed watching  $   special #PainatthePump over the weekend. (cont) 
 While  watches, China is trying to have the yuan overtake our dollar as the international (cont) 
 He  would do a great job on Saturday Night Live. 
 Paul Teutul Sr. is a fantastic guy. Although I fired him on #CelebApprentice, we will remain great friends. I love the bike he made for me.
 I have captured the smell of success. Meet me and the new "Success"  Herald Square April 18 5:30pm, first (cont) 
 My  interview discussing  reckless spending, the Buffet Tax gimmick and #CelebApprentice 
 #CelebrityApprentice Paul Teutul, Sr. joined me for a press event in Trump Tower last week- 
 Mike Bloomberg is doing a great job as Mayor of New York City. Ray Kelly is a great Police Commissioner. 
 I'll be on tomorrow at 7:30 am #TrumpTuesday
 Hear me on  now!#rozandmocha
 Find out what Success smells like. I'll be  Herald Square April 18 5:30pm to sign my new fragrance; first (cont) 
 I will be at  Herald Square April 18 to sign my new fragrance, #Success by Trump. First 100 customers receive a copy of my new book.
 It will be interesting to see how Jenna Talackova does as Miss Universe Canada. We all wish her luck.
 The FDA must immediately stop allowing massive dose vaccinations in babies. It is mind boggling that they allow this practice to continue.
 Axl Rose should take his #rockhall2012 honors and be happy. Stop the no induction nonsense. Do it for your fans 
 Just left the best golf course in the State of California-  When in the LA area, check it out even (cont) 
  who wants to raise all our taxes, only pays 20.5% on $790k salary.  Do as I say not as I do.
 If  policies are so advantageous then why is he constantly invoking Ronald Reagan on the Stump? 
 U.S. jobless claims are at a 2 month high.   gas policy and ObamaCare are directly killing jobs.
 One of the simplest joys of life is golf. A great game to both play and watch.
 Now  Vice-Chief of Joint Staff is defending China while they cheat  Wrong course of action.
 Many many people are thanking me for what I said about  & vaccinations. Something must be done immediately.
 Many countries are cutting back, big time, on ugly, industrial wind turbines. The energy is very inefficient & (cont) 
 The Celebrity Apprentice delivers the goods--and the puppets-- Sunday at 9 pm on NBC 
 I'll be on  at 7:30 AM Monday
 Attention to detail is critical; choose scents that exude sophistication & confidence. Find out more 4/18, 5:30 pm  Herald Square.
 Yesterday I was interviewed on  radio show  He also looked great wearing a (cont) 
 Excited to see that  has joined twitter. Melania and I are looking forward to hosting her next week (cont) 
 He  handled the Zimmerman matter very well. I am glad to see there will be a trial. Justice. Now let's wait for a fair trial.
 It's Thursday, how much $ has  wasted today?
 Congratulations to     and  for being named on (cont) 
 I’ve gotten many letters from people fighting autism thanking me for stating how dangerous 38 vaccines on a (cont) 
 My  interview with  discussing the GSA, the real estate market and Buffet's Net Jet (cont) 
 Gloria Alred did nothing to help Jenna Talackova become a  Canada contestant. I decided before she (cont) 
 I'll be speaking this afternoon at the San Jose Convention Center (CA) at the first-ever National Achievers Congress. 
 I'll be on THe Willis Report  today at 5 pm EST
 I developed the Wollman Rink under budget and in record time  If I hadn't gotten involved, it would still be unused.
 China attempted to sell embargoed computers to Iran  China loves these deals!
 He  is a successful entrepreneur.  successfuly ruined America's credit. Easy choice in November.
 There can never be a sharp economic recovery until  is out of the White House.
 The Fed should not do QE3. Neither the economy nor the dollar can withstand another round of artificial liquidity.
 I'll be speaking tomorrow at the San Jose Convention Center (CA) for the first- ever National Achievers Congress 
 Thousands of US warplanes, ships and missiles contain fake electronic components from China, leaving them open (cont) 
 Watch  Ready-To-Wear Fashion Show at  featuring  and  
 Good news-- did the right thing. I congratulate him on running a very good race. Now it's onto  -- go get him Mitt!
 He  wants 23 years of  tax returns  Let's see BHO's school (cont) 
 Looking forward to keynoting the NC GOP dinner  NC is a critical swing state which (cont) 
 If the woman who is constantly hounding Augusta National would finally stop, I have little doubt that Augusta (cont) 
 He  proves once again why  anti voter ID stance is wrong  (cont) 
 He  is sounding more and more like a real team player...he is a really good guy!
 This Thursday, April 12, I'll be speaking at the first-ever National Achievers Congress at the San Jose (cont) 
 Jenna changed her name from Walter to Page and then to Jenna so that now her name is Jenna Talackova. If you (cont) 
 My  interview discussing  Warren Buffet's tax situation and  strategic mistake 
 They keep sending me free  magazines in the mail--stop already.
 Just like Graydon Carter drove Spy Magazine into bankruptcy, he will preside over the end of  He (cont) 
 Now they say obese women may cause Autism in children- nonsense, they use any excuse. The FDA should immediately (cont) 
 Thomas Kinkade died. I happen to love the beauty of his paintings. He took a lot of heat from art critics who (cont) 
 I will miss Mike Wallace. He did a major interview with me for 60 Minutes and it was totally fair and balanced. (cont) 
 Vanity Fair Magazine, which used to be one of my favorites, is failing badly. Newsstand sales are plummeting--- (cont) 
 #CelebrityApprentice contestant  stopped by to visit today- 
 Congrats to  on winning the Masters. He did it without heavy reliance on coaches and the other hanger-ons - he just played golf.
 I made my decision to allow Jenna Talackova to participate in Miss Universe Canada two days before Gloria Allred (cont) 
 Vote for Mar-a-Lago- 
 #MidasTouch is divided into five sections. The second is the index finger which represents Focus- 
  has created more jobs in the private sector than  has as President.  record (cont) 
 $6 gas is coming sooner than later. America must become energy independent with our own resources and fast.Also, (cont) 
 THe WH should not have hosted the Muslim Brotherhood.  friends are enemies of the US and  The Islamist winter is here.
 It's  wants to raise all our taxes--who applauds China for cutting their taxes! (cont) 
 His  budget: interest payments to China will exceed US defense spending by 2019   America!
 Looked at plans for Trump Doral Country Club today. It will be amazing! Glad to be in Miami.
 Proud to see my friend Governor Chris Christie standing up for Israel on his visit. Standing tall!
 Arrived in Palm Beach, drove by a gas staion, $4.50 a gallon. Result of failed  leadership.
 The #CelebrityApprentice Sunday night on NBC at 9 PM. Another exciting episode is ready to go. 
 Don't miss me on  Monday at 7:30 AM
 Vote for Mar-a-Lago- 
 I’ll be on “Justice” with  Saturday night at 9PM ET on 
 My book with  Midas Touch is divided into five sections. The first is the thumb- 
 I'll be speaking at the first-ever National Achievers Congress at the San Jose Convention Center on Thursday (cont) 
 While  criticizes the GOP budget, his own party graded him with an "F" by voting down his budget in the House 414-0.
 Oprah will end up doing just fine with her network--she knows how to win. 
 He  is now losing in the latest  to  in Pennsylvania  Rick is wasting everyone's time.
 This is a great time for  to bow out with dignity.
 My  interview discussing  USC comments, insurance premiums,  on the (cont) 
 My  interview discussing healthcare monopolies,  oil prices and  birthday 
 Mar-a-Lago, my club in Palm Beach and one of the greatest mansions ever built, has been nominated as one of (cont) 
 Why gas prices will rise, Miss Canada/Miss Universe, and #CelebApprentice in today's #trumpvlog... 
 I'll be speaking on Thursday, April 12, at the first-ever National Achievers Congress at the San Jose Convention (cont) 
  doesn't believe in the Supreme Court or its power--I thought he was a constitutional lawyer. Why (cont) 
 Remember what I said about  attacking Iran before the election--I hope the Iranians are not so (cont) 
  has a limited window to exit the race and to keep both his integrity and reputation...the time to (cont) 
 He  made a deal with Saudi Arabia to pump the hell out of oil until after the election. Watch what (cont) 
 My twitter account is now reaching more people than the New York Times--not bad. And we're only going to get better!
 #CelebApprentice contestants  and  joined me for interviews today- 
 Another solar company  funded with our money has filed for bankruptcy  One (cont) 
 He  said it would be 'unprecedented' if the USC rules that ObamaCare is unconstitutional. It was (cont) 
 Real estate is always a great asset to own but especially now. Try to take advantage if you can and buy (cont) 
 He  should not be trying to intimidate the USC justices on ObamaCare. He is worried because SG (cont) 
 My #TrumpTuesday  interview discussing golf, VP choices, the real estate market & healthcare reform 
 Disaster! After spending $5T in 3 years,  campaigns on spending even more so he can redistribute the (cont) 
 Chinese demand is raising the price of oil to$123/Barrel  We need to use our own energy resources.
 If  loses Wisconsin tomorrow and he still doesn't get out, you have to realize that at some point (cont) 
 What will be  excuse tomorrow after  wins Wisconsin and Maryland? Time for Rick to face reality and drop out.
 The US should not give a penny of foreign aid to Egypt if the Muslim Brotherhood takes over the country. We (cont) 
 I'll be on  today at 4:20 pm 
 America's competitors love   says  has been "the best 3 years" for Russia 
 My  interview discussing  attacks on capitalism, Autism & vaccinations and #CelebApprentice 
 #TrumpTuesday  7:30 AM tomorrow. Be sure to tune in.
 I'll be on  on Monday at 7:30 AM.
 Be sure to download my new The Celebrity Apprentice app to begin interacting with this Sunday's episode 
 Some exciting news--the newest acquisition of Trump Golf--Trump National Golf Club, Charlotte NC, formerly The (cont) 
 He  wants record high gas prices--drilling permits on federal land are declining under his regime 
  is a disaster. Despite the mandate there will still be 27M uninsured and premiums will rise at FASTER rate 
 White House Press Sec. had a hard time explaining why  supported tax breaks for oil companies in (cont) 
 I'll be speaking at the first-ever National Achievers Congress at the San Jose Convention Center (San Jose, CA) (cont) 
 Waste! With a $16T debt and $1T budget deficit,  is sending $770M overseas "to fight global warming" 
  studying ways to increase pressure on China over their currency manipulation and unfair subsidy practices 
 It was great seeing  and  yesterday- 
 Don't forget the three hour episode of Celebrity Apprentice this Sunday night 8pm-11pm on NBC. You're in for a (cont) 
 A study says  is out of control--a 78% increase in 10 years. Stop giving monstrous combined vaccinations (cont) 
  doesn't look injured to me. Even if he's in a fight, does he have to use a gun--and why shoot (cont) 
 Photo of  and me from yesterday's interview... 
 Bad news for   reports that the economy (71%) and gas prices (65%) are Americans' top (cont) 
  Biden is delusional. He is criticizing  on jobs.   economic record is an abject failure.
 The Fed must be reined in. In 2011, the Fed bought 61% percent of US debt--even more than 2008. Unsustainable! 
 In 2008  warned that "electricity rates will necessarily skyrocket" during his term. Mission Accomplished! 
  endorsement of  shows that the GOP is coalescing to defeat 
 He  received an early endorsement from the Soviet newspaper Pravda over  (cont) 
 The House Republicans and Democrats are finally unanimous! Yesterday they voted down  $3.6T budget (cont) 
 My  interview where I discuss the #ObamaCare USC argument, gas prices &  new clothing line 
 I wonder if  has promised Iran and China that he can be more flexible after his last election?
 The Afghan Security Forces who we are training have killed 52 U.S. soldiers  Time to get out of there!
  is desperate. He is now saying that he wants to be  VP.  He (cont) 
 When  is not vacationing, he is hosting his top donors in the White House  Always having a good time!
 Welcome to the 'Islamist Winter' - the Muslim Brotherhood is now taking over the Egyptian military and possibly (cont) 
 Global warming has been proven to be a canard repeatedly over and over again.  The left needs a dose of reality.
 My  interview discussing interest rates, the deficit,  timing,  and the Doral 
 Alex Rodriguez should substantially reduce his salary from the Yankees in that he misrepresented his use of (cont) 
 Behind the scenes photo of  and I filming an interview-  Watch tonight at 10PM ET on 
 I'll be interviewed by Greta Van Susteren  tonight at 10 pm ET on Fox.
 Let's not get too excited about Monday's U.S. Supreme Court oral argument on #ObamaCare before the decision. No (cont) 
  is losing his home state of Pennsylvania to    is only (cont) 
  - my description of  - "Future President" or "POTUS 45" or " Worst Nightmare"
 Not his 'per se'? A Friday document dump shows  all-hands-on-deck as Solyndra collapsed   lies.
 Mar-a-Lago, my club in Palm Beach and one of the greatest mansions ever built, has been nominated as one of (cont) 
 ObamaCare is clearly unconstitutional. Hopefully the USC rules correctly but in the end repealing ObamaCare requires a political solution.
 Whether  plan is sound fiscal policy is not the relevant issue, the issue is strategic timing. Why release it now?
 When confronted,  can't defend his ridiculous attacks on  
 He  is caught on tape making election promises to  on missile defense and national security 
 My  interview discussing the  acquisition of  and the timing of  plan 
 Trump Tuesday: I'll be on  tomorrow morning at 7:30 AM. Be sure to tune in.
 If you are a young entrepreneur just entering the business world, I highly recommend that you read "The Art of (cont) 
 He  is incapable of admitting that he is a complete and utter failure. He is 100% responsible for Solyndra. 
  is desperate. Now he is saying that he would prefer  over  (cont) 
  keeps taking credit for an increase in oil production. Of course his policies have nothing to do (cont) 
 The Chinese want to steal our jobs and technology--that includes so called green energy which they make but (cont) 
 I'll be on  Monday at 7:30 AM.
 Don't forget to watch Celebrity Apprentice this Sunday night at 9 pm on NBC. You're in for a great show. 
 Paul Ryan's budget is very dangerous for the Republicans--just before the election--be careful!
 Now the US military will have to have their raids approved in advance by Afghan judges  (cont) 
  called Republicans out of touch yesterday at a solar plant!  How much money has (cont) 
  has approved the southern half of the Keystone pipeline. What about the northern half--where the (cont) 
 The Iranians are conducting surveillance in NYC  The  Ray Kelly and  are (cont) 
  campaign is so inept he doesn't even have a full slate of delegates in his home state of (cont) 
 I am following the Trayvon Martin case carefully. It's a terrible situation that should never have happened. (cont) 
 Congratulations to Woody Johnson and  on acquiring  is not only a winner but a leader. (cont) 
 Happy Birthday to my legendary friend Aretha Franklin.
 The Saudis are taking credit for a meager 2% drop on crude  They always play this game (cont) 
 Strange--why didn't  hold any special event to celebrate the 2 year anniversary of ObamaCare? 
 He  has as much chance of being the GOP nominee as  does of ever having a successful (cont) 
 He  had another impressive win last night in Illinois. His delegate lead is insurmountable. It is (cont) 
 My  interview discussing the GOP primary, gas prices, the Doral purchase and my outlook on the economy. 
 They should seriously look into the moron George Zimmerman who shot and killed the 17 year old kid, Trayvon (cont) 
 Ron DeSantis, Iraq vet, Navy hero, bronze star, Yale, Harvard Law, running for Congress in Fla. Very impressive. 
 Played the Trump International Golf Club in Palm Beach last weekend. One of the best golf courses in the country. Perfect weather.
 He  wants to decide what books people can read, what movies they can see. #freespeech It doesn't work that way!
 Trump Tuesday on  7:30 AM, is getting very good ratings as is  on Mondays, 7:30 AM.
  should consider Gov McDonnell of VA, Gov Christie of NJ and Senator Rubio of FL for VP. Really good men doing a really good job.
 Just bought Doral Hotel & Country Club in Miami--within two years it will be the best resort in the country.
 I am deeply disturbed by what I have read in the case of  I support a full investigation and justice.
 I am so glad  got fired by  Rosie is a bully and it's always nice to see bullies go down!
 Why gas prices will cost  re-election: pain-at-the-pump-not-good-for-obama 
 Congratulations to  for being reckless. In his first 38 months in office the debt has grown at a rate that is unthinkable.
  2013 budget would add $3.5 trillion to annual deficits and raise next year's by $365 billion. He is wasting away our future.
 Trump Tuesday: I'll be on  tomorrow morning at 7:30 AM. Don't miss it.
 Why does  always have to rely on teleprompters?
 America is mired in the longest job recession since the Great Depression.  can get us out of it. (cont) 
 When  is not fundraising, he is issuing regulations. The 32 from 2011 will cost $10B annually and (cont) 
 My  interview where I discuss  being canceled yet again and how she just can't make it on TV 
 My  interview where I discuss why  is an economic ignoramus and how OPEC is inflating gas prices. 
 Give great credit to  for exposing the atrocities taking place in Sudan.
 Rosie O'Donnell has failed again. Her ratings were abysmal and Oprah cancelled her on Friday night. When will (cont) 
 Be sure to download my new The Celebrity Apprentice app to begin interacting with this Sunday's episode 
 #CelebApprentice fans watch today's #trumpvlog  to find out about our new App 
 We should have gotten more of the oil in Syria, and we should have gotten more of the oil in Iraq. Dumb leaders.
 Afghani soldiers--those on our side--killed 7 Marines last month.  They don't want us, what (cont) 
  has wasted billions of our tax dollars on speculative green projects like Solyndra. He is an economic ignoramus.
 Rising gas prices are causing a steep rise in consumer prices and will slow any future economic growth. It is a tax on all Americans.
 I'll be on  Monday at 7:30 AM. Be sure to tune in.
 Barack Obama is hard at work today on his highest priority--his reelection.  has 5 fundraisers in 2 cities. 
 My  interview with  where I explain that we need to start using our own domestic energy resources. 
  is clearly not a team player. If he was, knowing that he has a zero chance of winning the (cont) 
 Be sure to watch #CelebApprentice on Sunday night at 9 pm on NBC. Another great episode! 
 Once again,  proves he can't run a professional campaign. He is ineligible in large section of (cont) 
 He  invited his top campaign bundlers and donors to the British State Dinner  So corrupt!
 It's outrageous that Blagojevich goes to jail for 14 years when killers and sex offenders are out walking the (cont) 
 57% of Americans disagree with  contraception mandate on religious institutions.  He is plain wrong.
 Last week was a first in #CelebApprentice when I fired 2 celebrities at once. Wish I could FIRE  (cont) 
 I'm not a hunter and don't approve of killing animals. I strongly disagree with my sons who are hunters, but (cont) 
 A report of my phone interview with  where I discuss #CelebApprentice and other possible #Apprentice (cont) 
 I'll be on  today at 4:15 pm  ... tune in.
 The  administration now claims to have done "everything" to reduce gas prices  What about Keystone?
 SHOCK! ObamaCare will cost double what  promised -- over $1.76  -- and result (cont) 
 I commend  for defending the NYPD and Commissioner Kelly. The NYPD has done outstanding work in defending NYC from attacks.
  lost a big motion yesterday--she is entitled to nothing. The show made her--she should have been happy.
 The 2012 budget deficit is already $93 billion larger than earlier estimates   (cont) 
  did well last night. He won 2/4 contests and earned the most delegates.  will be the nominee. 
 The day after  blocks a Texas voter photo ID law,  exposes more dead people getting ballots 
  has won the most delegates, received the most votes and won the most states. The primary is over. Time to defeat 
  doesn't have an answer for how much Americans should pay for gas  He wants $6/gallon gas!
 #trumpvlog My thoughts on Afghanistan,  and why I fired two people on this week's #CelebApprentice... 
 My  interview discussing today's primary contests,  lead and my stock picks 
 My  interview from last Friday discussing the unemployment numbers, gas prices and acquiring the Doral 
 Trump International Hotel & Tower New York---winner of the Forbes Five-Star Hotel Award in 2009 through 2012. 
 NYC's top cop acted wisely and legally to monitor activities of some in the Muslim community. Vigilance keeps us (cont) 
 He  should get out of the race so Republicans can focus on 
 Cadillac Championship at Doral a great success--I just bought Doral--it will be amazing. Cadillac a great American car.
 His  specialties? Vacations and campaigning. Jobs not so much!
  has requested the bunker buster from the U.S.  Giving it to them will pressure Iran even further into a deal.
 He  is ineligible for 30 delegates next month due to his campaign missing deadlines. (cont) 
 Would anyone in the music industry treat a Democrat like this?  is being punished for his political views 
 Doral Tournament was great--best 18th hole in golf and a wonderful winner in 
 Many people ask me to review things. As I see them, I will do so.
 Afghanistan is a total disaster. We don't know what we are doing. They are, in addition to everything else, robbing us blind.
 China talks about the so-called "carbon footprint" and then, behind our leaders backs, they laugh. They could (cont) 
 The US is stupidly closing all of its coal fired plants while at the same time we're selling our coal to (cont) 
 Maniac Sergeant who went on a killing spree in Afghanistan must be punished, big time, and quickly.
 Pathetic:  did not want to veto Keystone himself--so he lobbied the Democrats in the Senate to defeat it. 
 Tomorrow is #TrumpTuesday on  at 7:30 am ET
 Seems to be the next election must be about jobs and gas prices--not birth control.
 When I was 18, people called me Donald Trump. When he was 18,  was Barry Soweto. Weird.
 Personally, I'm glad the NYPD is monitoring the actions of certain extremists. New York's finest! I support them.
 Be sure to download my new "The Celebrity Apprentice" app to begin interacting with this Sunday's (cont) 
 The Celebrity Apprentice, Sunday night at 9 PM on NBC. Another great episode! 
 I'll be on  Monday at 7:30 AM, don't miss it.
 Coincidence? More than half of  47 biggest fundraisers have been given administration jobs. 
 The only candidate who can get 1145 delegates is  The primary is over.
 BarackObama set a record deficit last February - $229 billion while borrowing 42 cents of every dollar it spent.  is reckless.
 The  recovery - US unemployment is 9.1%, US underemployment is 19.1%  Businesses won't hire under Obama.
 My interview with  discussing  Super Tuesday and why  must be defeated. 
 Excited by my acquisition of Doral Hotel & Country Club in Miami--already world class, but will soon be The Best.
 Ray Kelly is the best Police Commissioner in NYC history. Keeping NYC safe thru vigilance. 
 He is a professional and true gentleman:  is one of my favorite contestants from #CelebApprentice.
 Gas is $6 already in California. Don' worry -  Algae energy policy is going to pay major (cont) 
 He  will lose a delegate in Oklahoma--he only got 57% of the vote in the Democrat primary 
 He  claims he does not want higher gas prices. That's not what he said in 2008: 
 As an "honorary Buckeye" I want to thank the OH GOP primary voters for putting  over the top. It was a crucial win.
 My interview with  on behalf of  discussing why the GOP must nominate  
 My interview on  discussing why  will defeat  with a strong campaign. 
 Happy and proud to help  win Ohio with robo-calls in pivotal Cuyahoga County
 Someone should ask  in today's press conference how he accumulated more debt in 3 years than the first 42 presidents combined.
 He  promised to close Gitmo in his first year. It is still open 3 years later and about to get a (cont) 
 Strong leader:  Netanyahu explained at AIPAC the threat Israel faces from Iran's nuclear drive. He is (cont) 
 He  is using the IRS to sabotage the Tea Party  What about the Occupy Wall Street groups?
 China is raising its defense budget by 11%   wants to cut ours by over $1Trillion. Wrong policy.
 Today will be a Super Tuesday for  -- he will win over 220 delegates from states across every region. He will be the nominee.
 With respect to Iran, we have all the cards--they are scared stiff! I can't believe we aren't able to negotiate (cont) 
 My  interview discussing why  is a great nominee, gas prices and why George Will is a loser. 
 A MUST READ!  last article--The Vetting, Part I:  Love Song to Alinsky 
 I fully support the   and  They should all be honored for protecting us since 9/11---not demonized.
 He  lost his 06 Senate race by 18 points. He is also disqualified for 18 Ohio delegates. (cont) 
 Once again,  speech at  yesterday proved that he is more concerned about containing  (cont) 
 Shock! Obamacare's high risk pool spending DOUBLED government estimates   is bankrupting this country!
 This is good news -  has  with a slight lead in Ohio. Super Tuesday will show that the party is uniting behind him.
 My  interview from this morning 
 I am honored to have recorded a robo call on behalf of   Ohio needs to put  over the top!
 Trump Tuesday: Tomorrow morning I'll be on  at 7:30 am ET. We'll be talking Super Tuesday/politics, (cont) 
 Trump Tuesday: I'll be on Squawk Box tomorrow morning at 7:30 am ET on CNBC
 Dopey  the most overrated political pundit in the business, continues to downgrade the Republican (cont) 
 The real unemployment rate according to the CBO is 15%   economic recovery is all "Hope"
 He made a great contribution to the press-- will be missed.
  claims that his Koran apology "calmed things down"  US troops were killed by (cont) 
  is right--the Chinese have 'walked all over'    will rein in the Chinese.
  should stop pressuring Israel against attacking Iran and worry how he will stop the Iranian nuclear drive. 
 China is getting minerals from Afghanistan  We are getting our troops killed by the Afghani govt't. Time to get out.
 Gas prices are up 30 cents this month, rising 21 days in a row  Don't worry -  has a solution--ALGAE!
 After Super Tuesday, every GOP candidate should take a long hard look at their prospects and drop out if they can't get the nomination.
 I loved being a surrogate on behalf of  I am glad I was able to help him win.
 Ann Romney is a fantastic lady. She was great in thanking people last night! 
  Energy Sec. called for $7-$9 gas in January. Wish granted.   owns the gas prices.
 ObamaCare gives free insurance to illegal immigrants. Yet  is cutting our troops healthcare. (cont) 
 He was quick to issue an apology on behalf of America to Karzai. Why won't he release the letter?  
 My  interview from this morning discussing the price of oil, windfarms,Doral Hotel & Country Club and more... 
 New York Times Apologizes to Donald Trump A recent story in the New York Times incorrectly stated that Donald (cont) 
 Now Michelle Obama plays class warfare while fundraising  Why is anyone donating to a (cont) 
 The UK has run out of money and can't afford to borrow.  Neither can we but that doesn't stop 
 It is time Republicans stop attacking each other and focus on  America cannot survive a second term.
 #trumpvlog #Oscars Oscars' Biggest Losers- Sacha Baron Cohen and Vanity Fair...... 
 Great--with rising oil prices that are slowing economic growth,  looks to Saudi Arabia 'to contain' (cont) 
 It is time to get out of Afghanistan. We are building roads and schools for people that hate us. It is not in our national interests.
 Mitt Romney says anyone who thinks there's something wrong with being successful in America "better vote for the (cont) 
 What America needs:  follows in steps of Kemp and Reagan with pro-growth tax cut.
 Mitt Romney's Tax-cut proposal strongly pro-growth--what America needs.  
 My  interview discussing violence in Afghanistan, rising oil prices and  leads in AZ (cont) 
 I hear the worst, or at least most boring, Academy Awards party this year was the  party. It's lost (cont) 
  is a moron who should have been pummeled by the weak and pathetic security person who stood (cont) 
 This is good news:  is now leading in Michigan by 6 points according to  
 Pastor #Nadarkhani must be released by Iran immediately. I applaud the  &  for issuing (cont) 
 As gas prices keep rising,  won't approve Keystone. Instead he is pushing algae - yes, algae - as an (cont) 
 In 2008,  campaigned against $3.50 gas  It is now $6 in Florida and on the rise. He is a disaster!
 My interview with Michael Patrick Shiels on WJIM in Lansing on behalf of  
 My  interview with  discussing the #CNNDebate and how to deal with Iran without using force 
 I'm on  every Monday morning at 7:30...
 Take a tour of this amazing residence at Trump World Tower..... 
 Clive Davis gave a great eulogy at my friend Whitney Houston's funeral--absolutely amazing!
 Debbie Wasserman Schultz is hard to watch or listen to--no wonder our country is going to hell!
 HALF of Americans don't pay income tax despite crippling govt debt... 
 Irony!  was in Florida yesterday fundraising. Gas also rose to $6/gallon for Florida drivers yesterday. 
  to  in #CNNDebate: In 2008 You Called Me "Really Conservative" 
 Iranian Pastor #Nadarkhani has just been sentenced to death by the Mullahs because he is a Christian (cont) 
 In last night's #CNNDebate  proved once again why he is the steady conservative who can restore America's future.
 My interview with  where I explain that gas is headed to $5, $6 and why  can't win 
 My robocall on behalf of  playing across the state of Michigan 
 Rev. Graham made a critical point.  has turned a blind eye to the Christians being persecuted in (cont) 
 He may be the worst reporter in all of sports:  of  He gets away with murder and most people (cont) 
 Now  wants us to believe the Republicans cancelled Keystone and are responsible for $4 gas. He (cont) 
  is having wonderful ratings once again.  &  I am very proud of this season.
  is a special player. He makes watching the Knicks fun. I think he can lead the Knicks far this season.  
 As the  took their 16th vacation this month, unemployment is back to 9% and underemployment at (cont) 
 The more I get to know  the more I like him. He has the judgment and private sector experience America needs in the White House.
 My interview with  on  on behalf of  discussing why Michigan needs to go for Romney. 
 David Letterman's show has become so boring and mundane. Somehow, every time I look, I can't help thinking of (cont) 
 Where are the jobs?  chart shows the colossal failure and broken promises of  'stimulus' 
 Iran's threats are no excuse for the 9 month high price of oil. OPEC is ripping us off while  watches. 
 If the GOP will have any chance to beat  in November, the great people of Michigan need to support  candidacy.
 As the nuclear crisis with Iran shows, America needs to import oil from a reliable region. Keystone XL Pipeline (cont) 
 Michelle Obama's weekend ski trip to Aspen makes it 16 times that Obamas have gone on vacation in 3 years. (cont) 
 My interview from yesterday with Art Lewis on  in Flint, Michigan on behalf of  
 Foreigners slashed the purchase of US debt late last year--the first time in over 2years. We must control spending. 
 My interview from this morning with Ron Jolly on News Talk 580 on behalf of  how he is right on China 
 My interview this morning with  discussing the Euro currency, the oil crisis and why  (cont) 
 Apprentice Wins: Sunday results: NBC/Nielsen Ratings From 9-11 pm ET, the debut of "The Celebrity Apprentice" (cont) 
 Mark my words, a gallon of gas will be $5 during the summer. OPEC is ripping us off. There's nobody in our (cont) 
 Watch #CelebApprentice this Sunday at 9PM ESTon  has received many 4 star reviews.
 Admitted: Treasury Secretary admitted that their 2013 budget does nothing to address America's (cont) 
 Our ally Canada wants to send their oil down south to us.  is forcing Canada to send it west to China.
 He  wrote a great piece on China   criticized him (cont) 
 My  discussing the  discussing the cast 
 Don't forget! Sunday night at 9 pm EST on  Apprentice is back! Tune in for a great show. 
 Weakness is very dangerous:  is going to unilaterally disarm our nuclear arsenal. America keeps the world safe!
 Bush was called "unpatriotic" by  in '07 for adding $4T to debt   increased it $6T in 3 years.
 The Fed is considering issuing even more US bond debt into the market. Not good!
 Gallup poll proves that  regulation and Obamacare are stopping small business owners from hiring  SHOCK!
 Yesterday China VP Xi stressed "the benefits of trade with China" to Congress  We need FAIR TRADE with China!
 Old Post Office Building in DC will be a world-class Trump property. Honored to be doing this historic building--Washington will be proud.
 He  gets the China problem, why don't the others?
 Very successful fund raising for  yesterday. Good to see my friend Woody Johnson.
  You have to find a business that you love. That's number one. Success requires passion. Then keep your focus and never give up.
  Maybe they don't want to.
  Thanks, I'll keep at it.
  No, not trademarked.
 Pat Caddell on Neil Cavuto tonight: "I've watched Donald Trump take on the issues of energy and he ties it to (cont) 
 Canada's PM was in China last week brokering a deal to sell the oil  rejected in Keystone.  Unbelievable!
 Scenes from last night's episode of  where  and I visit the OCC HQ 
 Wrong Policy:  wants to cut defense spending by $487B while China is building their navy in the Pacific. 
 The recession was made worse by  A $900Billion deficit is not getting better.
 When the economy is bad,  wants to raise taxes. When the economy is good,  wants to raise taxes. Notice a trend?
 Iran's attack on Israeli diplomats is an attack on the West
  You'll have to watch to find out.
 So  had another game winning shot last night. Looks like the Knicks have not only found a new point guard (cont) 
  I was in my twenties.
  I like to invest in what I know, which tends to be real estate, but I keep an open mind.
  I don't think it has run its course. There are opportunities. Finding them and maximizing them are key components for success.
  My agenda is such that I can't meet with you, but it's always nice to be asked and I wish you the best.
  That could be a possibility but there are no plans at the moment. This season of Celebrity Apprentice is great--be sure to watch.
 A clip from my interview with  discussing the cast of  Season 5 
 Flattering. Over 500 upset people called Mar-a-Lago disappointed I am not running for President--but Mitt Romney will do a great job.
 Next to Chinese VP Xi Jinping yesterday,  said he welcomes China's "peaceful rise." (cont) 
 Have any questions? Send them in. #TrumpQ/A
 In today's #trumpvlog I speak about the chopper recently made for me by   #CelebApprentice
  budget funds the "Arab Spring" with $800B and the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt $1.3B in military aid. He loves radical Islam.
 This is dangerous:  is seeking to shrink Israeli military funding but gives $1.3Billion to Muslim (cont) 
 A gallon of gas is $3.523 today and has never before risen so high early in the year  The  policy realized!
 So wrong!  is hosting China's VP Xi Jinping today at the Pentagon with a full honor ceremony with music and cannons...
 A day after  released a trillion dollar budget deficit, he is hosting China's future leader VP XiJinping. America's new reality.
 Congressional Black Caucus Chairman Emanuel Cleaver is right.  budget is a "nervous breakdown on paper." 
 A day after Greece burned  released a $3.8 Trillion budget for 2013 with a $900 Billion deficit.He will turn America into Greece
 Watch Late Night with Jimmy Fallon on NBC at 12:35 EST tonight---I'll be bringing a couple of surprises with me.
 He capitulated to China-- abandoned a senior level Chinese officer who wanted to defect to the US: WRONG! 
 This Sunday at 9 PM EST on NBC the other primary starts -  Season 5 premieres!18 Wild Cards. One Trump Card.
 Congratulations to  for CPAC and Maine straw poll wins. He will get tough with China and save America.
 Honored to have passed 1 million twitter followers. We are making America #1 again. #TimeToGetTough
 This has to stop!  loves accruing American debt--he missed his budget deficit goal by over $500 billion. 
 My  interview discussing my friend Whitney Houston,  CPAC speech,the economy and primary 
 Whitney Houston was a great friend and an amazing talent. We will all miss her and send our prayers to her family.
 This week we saw what Obama Care actually does when implemented. It is a losing issue for  and must be repealed.
  class warfare rhetoric is taking a backseat for the DNC convention. He is charging $1 Million for a single suite.
 The $25 Billion settlement with the banks on mortgages will slow the housing market down even more and create higher user fees. Stupid!
 “Our country is the greatest force for freedom the world has ever known. We have big hearts, big brains, and (cont) 
 “As someone once put it, ‘Marriage is the greatest ‘anti-poverty’ program God ever created.’” #TimeToGetTough
  will give a great speech at CPAC today. He understands the threat from China.
 “Obama doesn’t respect the fact that the money he wastes belongs to us. He thinks that the wealth you create (cont) 
   interview with  discussing  the economy and politics 
 Keystone must be approved. Oil is at a record high. We need to use our resources and support allies like Canada.
  Timing is important, so considerations such as your financial situation and how solid your plans are should be reviewed.
 The Church is yet another victim to his liberal agenda:  lied to his Catholic supporters to pass ObamaCare.
 Q/A  The secret behind my success is that I love what I'm doing. That gives me energy, focus (cont) 
 The Fed is destroying the dollar. When inflation hits the economy then even more jobs will go overseas.
 Q/A  Yes, I'd give the real numbers.
 Q/A  I receive a great many requests for interviews, nationally and internationally.
 Why should he? He's only the POTUS--and  has "no opinion" on whether the Senate should pass a budget. 
 Lawrence O'Donnell will soon have another cancelled show to go along with his three cancelled TV series, "Mister (cont) 
 #trumpvlog Windfarms in today's video blog... 
 My  interview with  discussing the 2012 GOP primary and ObamaCare's attack on the Catholic Church. 
 My  interview with  discussing  electability and  Senate loss. 
  My best secret for business is that you have to love what you're doing. You need passion. (cont) 
  Every citizen has the right to do political analysis--and should--as well as to endorse (cont) 
 Who is the dumbest man on TV?  of MSNBC... 
  The best advice to a young entrepreneur is to read my book with Robert Kiyosaki, Midas Touch. (cont) 
  I wear suits from the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection.
 Jon Huntsman called to see me. I said no, he gave away our country to China! 
 Check out a picture of the custom made Trump Bike that Paul Teutul Sr. presented to me today in Trump Tower-- 
 #trumpvlog My thoughts on  in today's video blog... 
 ObamaCare is an attack on our country's identity. The latest victim is the Catholic church. It must be full repealed. 
  I already have two great pilots.
  I have not met  but his song, Donald Trump, has had over 40 milion hits. Maybe he should pay me somethiing.
 Government dependency has surged over 23% since  has taken office.  He is creating an entitlement culture.
  Sorry, she's taken.
  I only require four hours of sleep per night.
  hard at work yesterday shooting a marshmallow cannon in the WH East Room while our country burns. 
  As a parent, education has a high priority, it is very important. I went to one of the best schools and (cont) 
 Glad to see no charges against Greg Kelly. His accusers' charges never made sense!
 I see my friend  is speaking at CPAC. Solid guy, wonderful job. #sayfie 
  My first job was working for and with my father, Fred C. Trump.
  In answer to your question, my favorite thing to do is spending time with my family.
   He's not a smart man. He is a poor journalist and he likes fabricating the truth-- all reasons why his ratings stink!
 Eli Manning. Great Athlete. Great Guy.  great teamwork!
 Why is  the only guy who talks about getting tough with China and their currency manipulation?
 China did a major number on us during the reign of  He was easy pickens!
