I am Kanye West, and that feels especially great to say this year. I came here to present my new video, but before I do that, I'mma talk. Now, later tonight, 'Famous' might lose to Beyoncé, but I can’t be mad. I'm always wishing for Beyoncé to win, so.
But for people to understand just how blessed we are... It was an expression of our now, our fame right now, us on the inside of the TV. You know, just to put... the audacity to put Anna Wintour right next to Donald Trump. I mean, like, I put Ray J in it, bro. This is fame, bro! Like, I see you Amber. My wife is a G. Not a lot of peoples' wives would let them say that right there. We came over in the same boat. Now we all in the same bed. Well, maybe different boats, but uh.
But if you think about last week, there were 22 people murdered in Chicago. You know, like, people come up to me like, 'Yeah, that's right! Take Taylor!' But bro, like, I love all y'all. That's why I called her.
So I was speaking at the Art Institute last year, and a kid came up to me and said ‘Three of my friends died, and I don’t know if I’m gonna be the next.’ And it has to, you know you have to think, like, when you’re a senior and it’s the last month and you just don’t feel like doing any more work. If you feel like you seeing people dying right next to you, you might feel like, what’s the point? You know like life could be like, starting to feel worthless in a way. I know times for me, I sit down and talk to older, like, like, rich people. You know, a.k.a. white, you know. And they tell me, 'Don't compare yourself to Steve Jobs. Don't compare yourself to Walt Disney,' and my friend Zekiah told me... they tell me, 'Don't compare yourself to these people, right.' My friend Zekiah told me there's three keys to keeping people impoverished: that's taking away their esteem, taking away their resources, and taking away their role models. My role models are artists, merchants. There's less than ten that I can name in history. Truman. Ford. Hughes. Disney. Jobs. West.
Bro. Bro! Tonight, we here to have fun. I'm standing in front of my idol, Puff Daddy. I'm standing in front of my wife, Kim Kardashian West. I'm standing in front of the future: Chance the Rapper, 2 Chainz, Jaden Smith. Bro, we are undeniably the influence, the thought leaders. I'm gonna play y'all a piece of my art, and I just hope y'all have a good time. Play that.

Stop it, stop it. Hey radio, fuck you! Radio, fuck you! Y'all don't want to lose again. A lot of people here tonight felt like they lost. You know why? Because y’all been lied to. Google lied to you. Facebook lied to you. Radio lied to you. Radio, fuck you! I know it’s a lot of real niggas working at radio, real people, real programming directors with wives and kids that love music, that can’t play what they want to play because they’ve been paid to play that bullshit over and over and over. And when I say that bullshit, what I'm saying is we love Drake, Drake is great. He’s a great artist. But Frank Ocean is great, too. But you know who the greatest of all of us? Who do y’all think? [Crowd shouts “Kanye” and other names] Nope. Kid motherfucking Cudi. Radio, fuck you! Oh yeah, I’m on my Trump shit tonight. Radio, fuck you. Yeah, I’m taking his lead. I’mma just say how I say, be ‘Ye, and win. I’mma take his lead. Radio, fuck you! Radio, fuck you! Wait a second. Eh, is it, “Radio, fuck you? That’s what you’re saying?” Exactly.
Not fuck the people that work at radio because these is real people that gotta feed they kids and they’re not being allowed to play that real shit because they think that in order to feed they kids they gotta play the same shit over and over and over. I was raised by KMS 1, I was raised by Tribe Called Quest, I was raised by DMX. The last real nigga alive? Naw, nigga! We real niggas alive, we alive tonight, bruh! We alive tonight, bruh! Virgil Abloh is alive tonight, bro. A$AP Nast is alive tonight, bro. [A$AP] Bari is alive tonight, bro. Ian Connor is alive tonight, bro. [A$AP] Rocky alive tonight, bro. Aye, y’all love my show. When I say these names, y’all better scream for me. I don’t give a fuck if you know the names or not, go ahead, Google them. They will give you a little bit of factual information. They will give you that. Why did I name A$AP? Because that’s the future. That’s the niggas they got me and Cudi [...]. It’s life.
We’ve got a hundred years out here, a hundred years on this planet, bro, and we can have a utopia. We can love each other. But the rules gotta be fair. Khaled and Drake and radio and Doc and [Real] 92.3 and everybody. Is it just me or did you hear that song so many times “you say you wanna play for free.” Aye, aye. You know what it is, though? Because aye, I love Drake. I love Khaled. But they set that song up, bro. And let me tell you something: MTV, fuck you! Once again, as always. I’m on my Trump shit tonight. Let me tell you what it is, bruh. Aye, you know me. I went down seven years of my life of motherfuckers hating me for saying Beyoncé had the best video. Hey, baby, let’s rock and roll tonight. Y’all might be experiencing a lot of pop shit, but the vibes is back. The prodigal son, Kid Cudi, has returned. The vibes is back. I know it’s going to be a lot of conversations after tonight.
Khaled, I know you got hitters from Miami. Please do not send them at my head. I just want to have a conversation about how we playing radio’s game. Khaled, you a real nigga. Khaled, you a real nigga. You got the keys. But as we learn all the politics that niggas was doing for years. Obama couldn’t make America great because he couldn’t be him to be who he was. Black men have been slaves. Obama wasn’t allowed to do this [screams] and still win. He had to be perfect. But being perfect don’t always change shit, bro. Being perfect don’t always change shit, bro.
So, when I talk about MTV, let me explain something. I was hurt. Beyoncé, I was hurt because I wanted to present a video called “Fade” and I don’t expect MTV to help me. Mr. West, I don’t respect you. I will let you know that Beyoncé is winning the video tonight for “Formation” over “Hotline Bling” and “Famous.” They told me beforehand so I wouldn’t run on stage. Hey, bruh, y’all ain’t gotta fuck with me, but you know I got the vision and you know I’mma gonna keep it real with you. Beyoncé, I was hurt. I went down seven years on behalf of your—eh, nigga! Don’t [...] no shit while I'm talking. I am putting my career, my life, my public well-standing at risk when I talk to y’all like this. This is a moment in the [...], bro. The vibes is back. The vibes is back. Motherfuckers might feel a way about this tonight. Beyoncé, I was hurt because I heard that you said you wouldn’t perform unless you won Video of the Year over me and over “Hotline Bling.” In my opinion—now, don’t go trying to diss Beyoncé. She is great. Taylor Swift is great. We are all great people. We are all equal.
But sometimes, we be playing the politics too much and forget who we are just to win. Fuck winning. Fuck looking cool. Fuck looking cool. Fuck being cool. Fuck all that, bruh! I’ve been sitting here to give y’all my truth even at the risk of my own life. Even at the risk of my own success, my own career. I’ve been sitting here to give y’all the truth. Jay Z, call me, bruh. You still ain’t calling me. Jay Z, call me. Aye, bruh, I know you got killers. Please don’t send them at my head. Just call me. Talk to me like a man. I’m not trying to be the man. I just am a man, the same as anybody here. I ain’t above, below none of y’all. We all equal. We all equal. This is the vibes, bro. This is the future. This is the way of thinking to make America great again. Ha! You didn’t like that! Guess what? Y’all need the vibes. I was hurt. Feelings matter, bro. The way motherfuckers put money up so high, popularity, radio spins. Feelings matter, bro. Feelings matter, bro.
It’s a new world, Hillary Clinton, it’s a new world. Feelings matter. Because guess what? Everybody in middle America felt a way and they showed you how they felt. Feelings matter, bro. It’s a new world. It’s a new world, Barack. It’s a new world, Jay Z. Hey, don’t send killers at my head, bro. This ain’t the Malcolm X movie. We growing from that moment. Let ‘Ye be ‘Ye. And wait a second. Do y’all agree with that? Let ‘Ye be ‘Ye. Wait a second. I ain’t hear enough screams on that. Let ‘Ye be ‘Ye.
People I'm not saying this out of my own well-being because it wouldn’t be smart out of my own well-being to say things like this. Radio, I done talked to you a bunch of motherfucking times. Y’all motherfuckers is behind the times. Because guess what, the Saint Pablo tour is the most relevant shit happening. The Saint Pablo tour is more relevant than radio and if y’all keep following old models, your ass is going to be Hillary Clinton. You might not like it, but they gotta hear it. I ain’t here to massage you with a fake truth, telling you that Hillary gon’ win over and over and over and then you wake up [and] you still can’t believe it! You know why? Because you was lied to by Google. You was lied to by Mark Zuckerberg.
Mark Zuckerberg, you wanna call me now? Do I got the vision, Mark Zuckerberg? Was you wrong? When I said I was $53 million in debt and you didn’t call me, was you wrong? You ate dinner, you asked my friend Anthony Schiller to have dinner with me. I told you about Donda. You said you would help and you didn’t. Then you went to look for aliens. Me and Kid Cudi are aliens right here, bro. The vibes is back. [Talking to DJ] Take it all the way back to the beginning. Shia LaBeouf, Kid Cudi feels a way. Give him a call.
Q-Tip, I love you, bro. Don’t tell me how to be me, though. I love you. The Tribe album is dope. I love you. Don’t tell me how to be me, though. I’ve been me. I am me. There’s a Richard Pryor interview that you can watch about people coming into power and not changing everything and just becoming a part of the power. That’s happened with musicians because they’re scared. I’m not scared. I’m here to change things. I am here to change things. And things won't change until people admit their own falsehoods. I got the visions, bro. That’s what I’ve been blessed with. My vision. I’m not always going to say things the perfect way, the right way. But I’m going to say how I feel. Right now, press get ready to write your passive-aggressive, LeBron James, racist comments. Season 4, racist comments. Get ready to have a field day, press. Get ready, get ready. Because the show’s over. 
I'll take one question. I wanted to vibe off an idea, and then I can riff off of that…they said I've got 20 minutes or so, I might go longer.
"OK, everyone please be completely quiet, because I can literally hear a whisper, and it'll throw off my stream of consciousness, and when I get my stream of consciousness going that's when I give the best, illest quotes. Literally, a whisper can throw it off.
"Today was the first time I realised, If I could have done it again I would have gone to the Art Institute over the American Academy of Art, I would have researched where I could have got the best and the strongest education.
"And I'm sure this will end up online, so I don't want to diss anyone at the American Academy, I'm sure it's equal to the Art Institute of Chicago by now, but at the time I was going I would look around at the work of the class and not feel inspired by the teachers, and I kinda, the idea of being a fine artist, that's a really difficult profession to get into, to be respected in, to make money at. Maybe the goal for some of the people was just to work at an advertising agency or at a record label.
"My goal, if I was going to do art, fine art, would have been to become Picasso or greater.
"That always sounds so funny to people, comparing yourself to someone in the past that has done so much, and in your life you're not even allowed to think that you can do as much. That's a mentality that suppresses humanity.
"Some of you here probably remember the night when the Donda tweets came through me and I started talking about professions that you guys are going into, that seemed they had nothing to do with a rapper. I was talking about a band of thinkers that could remove religion, race, gender, and somehow come together to find solutions for a broken planet.
"We have the resources as a civilisation to find a utopia, but we're led by the most greedy and the least noble.
"What I notice about creatives is that, and one of the reasons why I get into trouble, is, not only do I want to design video games, or make music, or ride bikes, I think one of the most important things to my ability to create so much in the past 30 years is my desire to play sports. I approach creativity like a sport, where if I have a drawing I react just like a jock: LOOK AT THE FUCKING DRAWING RIGHT THERE YEAH!
"We're all creatives here, we're all born artists. Some people are artists of business, some people are artists of composition.
"We were taught to hide our black fingernail polish and put our head down in the back of the class and not notice out of fear that someone might laugh at one of our ideas – that our idea could become a mockery or a failure in some way.
"There's a Bible saying, 'No weapon formed against me shall prosper'. Recently I've been doing interviews and I've had to go back to this verse because I don't think there's a living celebrity with more weapons formed against them, but I also don't think there's one more prosperous. So what weapons have prospered? The smoke and mirrors of other opinions.
"I was sitting with Steve McQueen, he shot the visuals for All Day 2 days ago, it's completely different to the Brit awards.
"So it doesn't get taken out of context, I'm going to use the word 'like'. I'm not saying it is, I'm using it as a comparison. So people that want to say 'Kanye goes to Oxford and tells everyone blah blah blah'. And I'm not telling you this. I'm telling you what I told Steve McQueen in private.
"What I said was The Matrix is like the Bible of the post-information age.
"I compared it like, when the hundred guys come at Neo, those are opinions, that's perception, that's tradition. Attacking people from every which angle possible. If you have a focus wide and master senseis like Laurence Fishburne and you have a squad behind you, you literally can put the world in slow motion.
"It's still February, right? (security guard shakes his head, everyone laughs).
"By the way, I don't know the days of the week. I just go to exactly when my appointment is.
"We'd just look at each other and say, it's still February. For the sheer mount of work that we were able to put into the world. Some of the stuff had been worked on for years coming, months coming. But nonetheless they came back to back to back to back. Answering every crazy interview question, blocking every shot, catching every rebound. Aside from the right I don't have to give my opinion publicly about artists, I probably would have been batting 2000. I know that's incorrect also.
"This humanity that I talk about, this civilisation that I talk about, this future utopia I talk about…it can only happen through collaboration.
"I love Steve Jobs, he's my favourite person, but there's one thing that disappoints me. When Steve passed he didn't give the ideas up. That's kinda selfish. You know that Elon's like 'yeah, take these ideas'. Maybe there are companies outside of Apple that could work on them and push humanity forward. Maybe the stock brokers won't like that, the stock holders wouldn't like that idea, but ideas are free and you can't be selfish with them.
"I think that progression of mind with the advent of a human being named Drake (laughs, smirks, crowd laughs) you know, this idea of holding onto a number 1 spot. And then you get this guy that comes and blows out the water every number 1 of any band ever. Be it me, or Paul McCartney [laughs].
"I understand that I'm a servant. And with my voice, with my ability to build relationships with amazing people, speak to amazing people. Call Elon Musk out of the blue, or call Obama out of the blue…he calls the home phone, by the way.
"With that, I have a responsibility to serve. Why do I say the Matrix is like the Bible? What is my definition of the Matrix? [he never answered this].
"I work with an artist called Vanessa Beecroft, and she bought my daughter some toys.
"I'd see toys that some people would buy for my daughter and I'd say this toy isn't quality. I don't want my daughter playing with this. There's not enough love put into this, this is just manufactured with the will to sell, and not the will of inspiration.
"Vanessa is very focused, she's like my eyes, she's a piece of my brain. She bought my daughter these three wolves, knowing the whole collection, that it'd play with the song Wolves, and based on this concept. And when my daughter saw these wolves, I've never seen her so happy. She was going so crazy, she was grabbing one, she was riding on top of one…I've never seen her happier than this moment. That level of happiness seems to be the thing that we're fighting for every day, that we're trying to buy back, trying to work for, especially in America.
"In America people really do wear $3000 shirts. For real. Here and in Stockholm people will be like 'oh dude, it's a $3000 shirt'.
"I'm assuming I'm probably wearing a $2000 shirt but I got it for free from the designer so.
"We've been sold a concept of joy through advertising, through car advertising, through fashion branding. It's not the concept of time, time with your family, time with your friends, the little time that we do have on earth and what we do with that. It was somehow sold to us through a Gucci bag or something.
"Time is the only luxury. It's the only thing you can't get back. If you lose your luggage – I'm not gonna say the obvious brand of luggage that I'd normally say because I've got a meeting with them soon – if you lose your expensive luggage at the airport, you can get that back. You can't get the time back.
"It feels like people do everything in life to get this BMW, this Benz, to get this townhome, to get 2.5 kids exactly. One of them has to be small, y'know!
"And you're looking for this moment where you sit in your BMW after all the work you've done and all the accolades you get, and you somehow think you're gonna get that level of joy that my daughter had when she received those wolves. And when you're sitting in traffic in your BMW, it's something that feels empty. To everyone who reaches that point. This concept of the selfish human, this idea of separation by race, or gender, or religion, or age, or my favourite thing to hate, class.
"People say it takes a village to raise a child. People ask me how my daughter is doing. She's only doing good if your daughter's doing good. We're all one family.
"We have the ability to approach our race like ants, or we have the ability to approach our race like crabs.
"This is a generation that is far less racist – yes, small remnants remain of even thinking of calling something of a racial slur.
"White people that listen to rap say 'nigger'…in the privacy of their own home.
"That idea [racism], has passed. We've had The Cosby Show, Obama's president, Beyonce's great…that's passed. But there's still something you're taught every day, especially in the UK, and that's division by class. Our main focus, in my opinion…Imagine a world with no war, and imagine if everyone's main focus, more so than going out to a club, their main focus was to help someone else.
"I was joking with an interviewer earlier today…people talk about the number of viewers the Brits get, or the number of viewers the Grammys get. They need to do award shows for the Nobel Peace Prize, but I guess that doesn't sell as many MasterCard commercials. Oh, I mentioned a brand! [looks disappointed]…I had two things…I was trying to get a flawless victory on my speech! No offence to MasterCard…but that was a big fucking logo in the middle!
"You guys have been taught, without you knowing, ways to separate yourselves from each other. If you're separated, you can be easily controlled. If you're too busy pointing fingers at each other, rather than holding hands, you can't get anything done.
"You know, Chris Rock called my album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy…well, Chris Rock and everyone else at every single media publication called My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy the best album of the last 25 years. This only came through collaboration.
"One of the most memorable things about MBDTF was Nicki Minaj, and the fact that she kicked my ass, on my own song, on one of the best albums…the best album – I'm just saying what the critics said – of the last 25 years. The best album of the past 25 years that I spent a year and a half making, out there. I was exiled from my country, it was a personal exile, but exile. To come back and deliver my magnum opus of a work, and to be outshined…to be beat by a girl, basically.
"This was necessary. I think it was one of the most important points of working on that album, was to not stop her from her moment because of how good she is. Just think of a comparison, if you think about why did it take so long for the new Yeezys to come out? Why did I have to leave one group and go to another group? Why did that group not want to speak to me? I think the Yeezys I was doing over there were comparable to that Nicki Minaj verse. Because these guys were like 'we're worrying about this shoe, we're gonna put it on this celebrity'. And the head's son would come and say 'my favourite shoe is the Yeezy'. And it's like 'ahhh, I can't hear about these YEEZYS anymore!'. Like everyone talking about Nicki's verse, 'I can't hear about this verse anymore!'. It was gonna work for her anyway, but let's just say that in some way in helped give her exposure. She was able to go on and become a successful, and fly, and run, and dream, and provide. And it was not locked because of my career.
"One of my biggest Achilles heels has been my ego. And if I, Kanye West, the very person, can remove my ego, I think there's hope for everyone.
"When I talk about collaboration and the creative process, the best idea wins.
"I'm proud of the consistency of the performances I've done since I've been out here. And it comes from four would-be egomaniacs coming out and being forced to work together. The best lighting guy on the planet, the best staging guy, the best video guy, another staging guy, a guy with a laptop for no reason…To be able to deliver, back to back to back, extremely successful, inspiring, groundbreaking, visual, visceral, creative moments that otherwise would have been challenged. And the kid from Chicago screaming from the top of the stage for 40 minutes in a row. I've had to pull that card out a few times. Not particularly screaming, but remember, I will scream.
"My momma taught me that if I was in a grocery store and I'm by myself and a stranger grabbed my hand, scream at the top of your fucking lungs. If I'm at an awards show and a stranger grabs my hand and they say so we're going to use these moving lights, or we're gonna play the music right now before we define the look, or we're gonna cut the TV cameras in a traditional way. I'll scream at the top of my fucking lungs.
"People say I have a bad reputation. I think I've got the best reputation in the building. They want you to have a reputation of tucking your black nail polish into your pockets and sitting in the corner of the class, and not fighting for your ideas out of fear of being ridiculed.
"That's one of my favourite ones…to be called crazy.
"I remember when I was young and saw my dad working on computers. And the guy he was working with ended up being a bad guy. And the guys that helped him, that he had the voice to find, didn't have the same motivation, a high enough skill set to match up to his vision, to his dream, for it to be considered to be a success. But the success is that his successor will be successful in his lifetime. You could say but you are successful. I'm successful in learning about the beauty that is afforded rich people. But in learning that, being brought up, middle class, it's something that is beating out of my chest. 'Wait a second, I was middle class, and I didn't get to see none of this shit!'.
"Let's have an NBC telethon moment, and say that beauty has been stolen from the people and is being sold back to them under the concept of luxury!
"It's illegal to not wear clothes, and also possibly too cold. That means someone is imposing an idea on you that should legally have to do! Clothing should be like food. There should never be a $5000 sweater. You know what should cost $5000? A car should be $5000. And you know who should work on the car? The people that work on the $500,000 cars. All the best talent in the world needs to work for the people. And I am so fucking serious about this concept that I will stand in front of anyone and fight for it. Because I was 14 and middle class. I know what it felt like to not get what I have.
"People say to me 'you're successful, what are you crying about?'. I'm crying about the people. I'm crying about their daughters. Our daughters, as one family. What good is it. What good is anything that everyone can't have. Every ism. They think we're done with racism. What about elitism, what about separatism, what about classism? That's all."

We’re in a renaissance period. We’re in a place where people are multi-disciplined artists. Like Steve McQueen who directed 12 Years a Slave. He was considered to just be a photographer, but then he won an Oscar. We’re not in a place where people can only have one career or one profession throughout their entire life. So the exact amount of emotion and color palette and sonics and everything I put into my music, I put them into shoes and they worked.

‘Kanye’s pissing everybody off.’ They try to position that through the media in some way that I’m like, whatever. Whatever your friends might say. ‘I saw Kanye.’ ‘How was he? Did he…?’ I care about people. My dad lived in homeless shelters less than five years ago. To find out he’s a psych major. My mom was the first black female chair of the English department at Chicago State University. I was raised to do something, to make a difference.

You know, I didn’t take the Oscars as a joke. It was funny. It was like the moment. All black actors can talk about the glass ceilings that we’ve dealt with out in this town. And this is the moment. ‘You get your night. Go ahead. Chris Rock is going to do it. Bam. Talk about how many times you’ve been blocked from being able to excel.’ I didn’t take it as a joke. It ain’t no joke, as Rakim said. It ain’t no joke. ‘I used to let the mic smoke, now I slam it and make sure it’s broke.’ That’s what I was raised on—Rakim, Phife Dawg, hip hop, expression. ‘Hip hop started out in the park…’

Everybody’s trying to…I don’t care how much you sold, if you’re playing on radio. Are you connecting? Picasso is dead. Steve Jobs is dead. Walt Disney is dead. Name somebody living that you can name in the same breath as them. Don’t tell me about being likable. We got 100 years here. We’re one race, the human race, one civilization. We’re a blip in the existence of the universe, and we constantly try to pull each other down. Not doing things to help each other. That’s my point. It’s like I’m shaking talking about it. I know it’s daytime TV, but I feel I can make a difference while I’m here.

I feel that I can make things better through my skill set. I am an artist. Five years old, art school Ph.D, Art Institute of Chicago. I am an artist. I have a condition called synesthesia where I see sounds. I see them. Everything that I sonically make is a painting. I see it. I see the importance in the value of everyone being able to experience a more beautiful life.

When I make clothes…It’s funny because I’ll sit there with Obama and Leo’s talking about the environment and I’m talking about clothes and everyone looks at me like, ‘That’s not an important issue.’ But I remember going to school in fifth grade and wanting to have a cool outfit. I called the head of Payless. I’m like, ‘I want to work with you. I want to take all this information that I’ve learned from sitting in all these fashion shows and knocking on all these doors and buying all these expensive clothes, and I want to take away bullying.’

Michael Jackson and Russell Simmons is the reason I was able to go so far in music. There was a time when Michael Jackson couldn’t get his video on MTV because he was considered to be ‘urban.’ The Michael Jackson. So I literally have to be the Michael Jackson of apparel in order to break open the doors of everyone that will come after I’m gone. After I’m dead. After they call me ‘Wacko Kanye.’ [crowd laughter] Isn’t that so funny? That people point fingers at the people who have influenced us the most. They talk the most shit about the people who cared the most. I’m sorry daytime television. I’m sorry for the realness.

I could of put that on Facebook, now I understand why he didn’t hit me back.

Put your hands in the air right now. Put your hands in the air right now. Yeah. Okay.

Man I can understand how it might be
Kinda hard to love a girl like me
I don't blame you much for wanting to be free
I just wanted you to know
Swizz told me let the beat rock

For all my Southside niggas that know me best
I feel like me and Taylor might still have sex
Why? I made that bitch famous (God damn)
I made that bitch famous
For all the girls that got dick from Kanye West
If you see 'em in the streets give 'em Kanye's best
Why? They mad they ain't famous (God damn)
They mad they're still nameless (Talk that talk, man)
Her man in the store tryna try his best
But he just can't seem to get Kanye fresh
But we still hood famous (God damn)
Yeah we still hood famous

I just wanted you to know
I loved you better than your own kin did
From the very start
I don't blame you much for wanting to be free
Wake up, Mr West! Oh, he's up!
I just wanted you to know

I be Puerto Rican day parade floatin'
That Benz Marina Del Rey coastin'
She in school to be a real estate agent
Last month I helped her with the car payment
Young and we alive, whoo!
We never gonna die, whoo!
I just copped a jet to fly over personal debt
Put one up in the sky
The sun is in my eyes, whoo!
Woke up and felt the vibe, whoo!
No matter how hard they try, whoo!
We never gonna die

I just wanted you to know

She take my money when I'm in need
Yea she's a trifling friend indeed
Oh she's a gold digger way over town
That digs on me
Now I ain't saying she a gold digger
But she ain't messing with no broke niggas
Now I ain't saying she a gold digger
But she ain't messing wit no broke niggas
Get down girl go head get down

Cutie the bomb
Met her at a beauty salon
With a baby Louis Vuitton
Under her underarm
She said I can tell you ROC
I can tell by ya charm
Far as girls you got a flock
I can tell by ya charm and ya arm
But I'm looking for the one
Have you seen her
My psychic told me she have a ass like Serena
Trina, Jennifer Lopez, four kids
An I gotta take all they bad ass to show-biz

As I lay me down to sleep
I hear her speak to me
Hello 'Mari, how ya doin'?
I think the storm ran out of rain, the clouds are movin'
I know you're happy, cause I can see it
So tell the voice inside ya' head to believe it
I talked to God about you, he said he sent you an angel
And look at all that he gave you
You asked for one and you got two
You know I never left you
Cause every road that leads to heaven's right aside you
So I can say

Hello my only one
Just like the morning sun
You keep on rising till the sky knows your name
Hello my only one
Remember who you are
No you're not perfect but you're not your mistakes

I've reached a point in my life where my Truman Show boat has hit the painting. I'm not trying to regurgitate myself. I'm a product person: not just clothing, but water bottle design, architecture, anything you could think about! Brought the leather jogging pants 6 years ago to Fendi, and they said no! How many motherfuckers have you done seen with leather jogging pants?!

I mean everyone out there in TV world, real world, whatever world you stay in, needs to know that I’ve never done a publicity stunt in my life. Any time I went up and spoke my mind, whether it put my career in jeopardy or whatever someone so called said, it was always what I thought was the truth. Whether I'm like reading from through a teleprompter or whatever I felt emotionally. I don't follow like rules of normal celebrity or what their publicist tells them to say. So I don’t do publicity stunts, period. So don’t ever think that.

Yeah, I knew you before. And I saw you at a wedding and I remember you telling me, I want people to know this side of you and different things like this and I saw this good guy at the wedding. So when I saw the skit - which I didn't watch all the way through because I didn't want to be infuriated - I was like I know you. So it was a combination of me knowing you, but also me NOT knowing the person who put a bad headline on the cover of In Touch. And me not knowing this person. So I was like this is the one person I know. So I can go and let out everything that I feel about every single bogus weekly cover, every skit, every single rumor in barber shops, everything that people feel is ok to treat celebrities like zoo animals or act like what they're saying is not serious, or their life is not serious or their dreams are not serious. And you know, it kinda just went and elevated from a call that we just had as men… that elevates sometimes, you take a guy, Jimmy does his thing. And I do my thing and at a certain point these egos can flare up and we kind of just took it back to high school for a minute.

 I’m not running for office, I’m just here to make good music, make people feel good when they hear my music. And you know when I did that [Zane Lowe] interview, I was really vocal about a lot of things that I've been dealing with over the past 10 years, when I was put in the classification of “just a celebrity.” Because you know for me, I’m a creative genius and there’s no other way to word it. I know you’re not supposed to say that about yourself, and I say things the wrong way a lot of times but my intention is always positive and I wanna bring more things to the world, I want to help the world. I want to make peoples’ lives easier. I spent 2 of my checks in telemarketing when I was 18 years old on a pair of Gucci slippers, and this is before there was H&M and Zara, you couldn’t just find cool stuff when you were growing up. And for me, I care about cool stuff. It means something to me, it means stuff to a lot of people that are like me, and that’s what I was talking about on the Zane interview.

So when I come on here, I can laugh and I can joke, and I can see a skit and we can say, ok we love Kanye or we think his baby is cute or whatever, but for me, it’s bigger than who I am and my presence, living. It’s about when I was on Earth what did I do to help? And at what point did I hit a glass ceiling where people said you’re a celebrity so you can’t help in this box, you can’t help in this box. But I talked to Quincy Jones at John Legend’s wedding, and you do music, you can do anything. Once you learn how to produce, you’re a producer, you understand textures and colors. I have an art background even before I was a musician. People told me I couldn’t rap. People had all this advice for me about how I shouldn't try to rap. And I wouldn’t even say I’m a rapper, I’m more of a messenger than a rapper.

So even when you say rap beef it sort of undermines it, and keeps re-contexting what I said. Whereas if you look at the Zane interview, it’s really something extremely fearless for someone in my position to do. Because most people just like bow down to TV or bow down to these cameras. Like I could care less about any of these cameras, all I care about is my family, I care about protecting my girl, protecting my baby, and protecting my ideas and my dreams. And ya know that's the reason why I went so crazy.

Oh my god. It comes with your first ticket to LA, soon as you get off the plane, here’s your false humility. Maybe if keep up with this act long enough and go with this agency they'll give you a star on the Walk of Fame one day for kissing everybody's ass. But it's like that's not what we're doing. By the way, I want to shoutout the Walk of Fame, because they said something like they’re not gonna put my girl on the Walk of Fame because she’s a reality star. It's like people are so so dated and not modern. There’s no way a Kim Kardashian shouldn’t have a star on the Walk of Fame. Its ridiculous old concepts. And you know for me, I’m just gonna give y’all the truth. It’s like my grandfather loved Ali until he died, and my grandmother hated Ali ’til she passed. So you’re gonna love me or you’re gonna hate me, but I’m gonna be me.

I’m totally weird, and I’m totally honest, and I’m totally inappropriate sometimes. And the thing is for me to say I wasn’t a genius, I would just be lying to you and to myself.

Yeah, that’s when I think of the best shit.

I was just at my place here, my old home here in LA. As we were writing it, there was a frustration I was getting out, but also they were really funny to me as I was writing it, and I just thought it was so amazing that I was saying this in real time, in real life. You know, with my position, people are so scared to say anything, you know, as soon as you’re a celebrity, you’re not to say anything anymore. But just to completely wild out…

The only reason I could do that is because we could speak on a similar level, and we can go back and forth.

I just thought that that was amazing, to crack media, in a way. You know, I feel that media does everything they can to break creatives, to break artists, to break people’s spirits, and I do everything I can to break media.

Fashion isn’t always practical. It’s more about emotion, it’s more about swag. It’s more about, you know, pussy. It’s more about, like, club. It’s more about style and stuff.

I remember me and my boy Virgil, that created the line Pyrex Vision. We sat as interns at Fendi like six years ago. We had cue cards and everything, and the leather jogging pants is one of the things we presented that didn’t go through, and the reason I brought that up in the Zane interview is because there are people who made whole careers off of creating leather jogging pants. It became a phenomenon over the past three years. And it was to say, you know, I would sit with Hedi Slimane, who’s now the head designer of Saint Laurent, and he’d say, “Stop giving these big brands your ideas and everything.” And it would just be like, what I was trying to express in the Zane interview was, like, me--I know I’m hip hop, and a rapper and everything--but I’ve got ideas that mean something if I could put the proper production around them. So when do a Nike Yeezy or a Louis Vuitton shoe, the production around it was at the same level as the production on my CD, or when me and Rick Rubin or Mike Dean of whoever are working together. But if I go out and make my own t-shirt or something, and I call it “Kanye,” everybody’s gonna think about when I just called myself a creative genius, and say “What’s so genius about this?” But when people line up for the Yeezy, they’re like, “Oh, wow, this is like really genius.” You need that production.

But currently in fashion and the way the fashion world works, there’s no black guy at the end of the runway in paris, in all honesty. And that’s what I was talking about when the Truman Show hit the boat.

Yeah, a black artist. So, for me, think about this: When I’m in Paris and I’m sitting in Fashion Week for nine years, and South Park makes fun of our outfits and all this, or people don’t understand why we’re there, I’m getting called names. Like stuff you can’t even say on TV. And I still can’t break that wall down. At a certain point, it’s like, Michael Jackson trying to get his videos on because, who do you know who’s known more for clothes than me? To not be able to do and produce to the highest level, and to have a meeting with everyone. I’m talking about Andrew Rosen of Theory, this guy over here, this guy who runs this company, Leanne ???. These are the real people who produce the clothes that are on your back. Zara, out there with Ortega, Francois Pinault, everyone. And everyone just sort of looks at you like you’re crazy and like you don’t crash the Internet. And you’re just like, “How can you get a shot?” And then you try to do it on your own, and like, real designers will work for a rapper, and you just cannot overcome it.

I mean, my grandfather drove the first cars in the marches just to get clean water, and one of the parallels I wanted to do for you is, like, Richard Pryor used to always talk about, he just wanted a clean plate. He just wanted to serve his stuff on a clean plate. So if I do an interview in W Magazine, right, and they take all these classist shots at me because--it’s not about racism anymore; it’s classism, that’s what I talked about.

Paula Deen, she was old-school with it. They’re like, “We don’t do it like that anymore, Paula Deen. We’re classist now.” So this classism is what they do to try to say, “You’re a rapper,” or “Your girl’s on a reality show. You’re not up here with us. You know, we’re old money, we--

It’s snobbery. And I’m not into all that snobbery. Because, you know what? We have the loudest voice, we have the loudest communication, and all we want to do is make awesome stuff. All we want is a real shot. Not: OK, I’m a celebrity, so that means my line has to cost ten dollars a t-shirt. No, I understand about quality. I understand about fabrics. I spent ten thousand hours at this. I’ve dedicated my life to this. And a lot of people say, “OK, you have to do music.” I’m gonna keep doing music, but what if people told me I couldn’t rap, what woulda happened? What if people told me I couldn’t perform. I’m only 36 years old; I have other goals and other things. And I’m gonna use my platform, every platform, to stand up and say, “I want to make something, I want to make the next Ralph Lauren.” That was the point of the Zane interview, to say, people don’t stand up to protect their dreams. People are too scared of getting, you know, spoofed in a way. [Turns to Kimmel]

And the irony of it is, think about a creative person in school. When you picture them, you’re probably picturing them all the way in the back of the class sketching or maybe getting beat up, and I’m the one creative, and this is the reason why I did this, because creatives have gotten beat up my entire life, and there’s moments when I stood up to drug dealers in Chicago and said, “You can’t have my publishing. Come and kill me. Do whatever you’re gonna do, but you’re not going to bully me, you’re not gonna stop me, because my mother made me believe in myself.” No matter how many people tell me, “Stop believing in yourself! Stop seeing what you can do! Stop affirming what you’re gonna do and then completing that in real life.” That’s the improper way to do it. I refuse to follow those rules that society has set up and the way they control people with low self-esteem. With improper information, with branding, with marketing… I refuse to follow those rules.

It’s about truth, it’s about information, it’s about awesomeness, and the only luxury is time. The time you spend with your family, that’s the only luxury. So this concept of “luxury” is improper to me. You know, with Nike, with Apple, you remember there was phones that cost 4,000 dollars?! Somebody pull out a Vertu phone right now, you look ridiculous, but there’s people who still spend five-thousand dollars on this bag, ten-thousand dollars on this to say, “Oh, we’re better than you.” I mean, taste, culture, art, you know, just the quality of your life. This is what I’m here to do, so when I compare myself to Steve Jobs or Walt Disney, Howard Hughes, David Stern, Michelangelo, Da Vinci, Jesus of whatever it is, I’m saying, “These are my heroes. These are people I look up to. This is the type of impact I want to make on the earth.” If I can make this type of impact up to this point, what can I do, if you call Bob Iger and say, “Yo, give him a shot.” If you call Oprah and say, “Yo, back this kid. This kid, his parents were educators. He wants to educate. He wants to look at curriculums and say, ‘How do we simplify that?’”

Exactly what I did in music, I want to apply to product, I want to apply to education. This is what my company Donda is about. I could rap all I want, but without that Roc-a-Fella chain, and Damon giving me that Roc-a-Fella chain. I don’t care how beats I sold to whoever, I couldn’t have made it to the point to make “Jesus Walks.” And now, even as a celebrity, I’ve reached a ceiling. And the way paparazzi talk to me and my family is disrespectful, also. We bring something of joy to the world. When people hear my music they have a good time. And I should be respected as such when I walk down the street. Don’t ask me a question about something you say in a tabloid. Don’t try to antagonize me. Cause, you know what, it’s not safe for you in this zoo. Never think that I’m not from Chicago for one second. And think you can walk right up and disrespect me and my family constantly.

And people say, “Well, you signed up to be a celebrity, blah blah blah…” It’s like, you know what, and I understand paparazzi, you gotta get your money, it’s hard out here, but let’s have respect for each other. You do help me get money, paparazzi, you show people how fresh my outfit is, that helps me influence people.

And another thing is, people are so gay-conscious now. That's like the whole thing like with the Internet — every day, somebody's- "Ooh I can tell he gay now!" you know, but back in the day, people used to have songs like "Get In That Ass" or something like that

You know Nike told me when I asked them? "We ain't sure." You know what they told the store though, of my- of my boy that run the store? They said "if you want that Red October, you gotta take these 10 other shoes." So they told me, they ain't sure, but then they told them, if you want that Red October- but legally, we gotta both sign that contract, Mark Parker. I'mma put Mark Parker all on that Summer Jam screen. And by the way, Mark Parker, yes I will still accept an investment in Donda. I got some more ideas that don't involve shoes. But if you guys that're investing in the arts, y'all don't want to invest in the school in Brazil, y'all wanna go to Africa, I am standing up and I'm telling you, I am Warhol. I am the number one most impactful artist of our generation. I am Shakespeare in the flesh. Walt Disney. Nike. Google. Now who's gonna be the Medici family and stand up and let me create more; or do you wanna marginalize me 'til I'm out of my moment

Good to see you too sir. Thank you

I had so many interviews where I’m trying to express that I can create, that I can create outside of just the music box and I’m giving examples of work that I did that was really successful and I’m getting just completely shut down. But not just by the company we talked about last time but every single company, every single company you could imagine is just like “no, you are celebrity. You are not allowed to create, you’re not allowed to think, you’re not allowed to have an opinion. You’re just here to wear a red leather jacket and shut up.” And it’s true that as a celebrity you can help to promote something quickly but no one wanted to allow me to think or be involved in the product and you know, as I told you last time I said I’m a product guy

I mean, every day when you go to the gym or you go to work it’s a challenge. You gotta work hard and you have to completely, tirelessly, countlessly remind people of your vision no matter what. So that’s the way I’mma word it. You know what I’m saying, so we made it to a point where something extremely close, something almost to the level, something past the level of the vision finally hit the globe and Adidas was a company that was flexible enough and had been used to dealing with creatives enough to allow me to create something that was very close to my heart. You know, they original hip hop

That conversation had already started before then. There was a few conversations with a few companies with a few sportswear companies and um, I remember calling Jon Wexler you know, it was a certain point where I just felt like I couldn’t breathe anymore like I had all these ideas and I felt like I was literally gasping for oxygen because if anyone’s creative, you know like we have this idea of a mass market looking at a celebrity that owns a Lamborghini complaining about something. And anyone that’s creative understands that there’s no amount of money that can be given to them to make them not want to or have to create. There’s no check out and there’s no cheque to stop you from creative. No pun intended when I’m saying no check

Just even thinking about it takes the breath out of me because I mean, as soon as we got the opportunity to actually start making things, there were so many ideas. I mean I look at over 500 images a day on my laptop. And I remember I went into the whole thing about Hypebeast, you know I said “people be dissing me on Hypebeast” and it’s like wait a second, dude, like I been fighting this battle for a long time, since like Universe City. Like no one has any idea what the meeting were like. I’mma throw this one out here. I remember this one guy that worked for Francois Pinault the head of Kering Group came up in my apartment in Paris, while I was working on Yeezus and I had a meeting with him and it was related to doing a deal with Puma. And the guy, actually I forgot about the meeting right, so I had my jacket on and it was a jacket I had done with A.P.C. and I was about to leave, so he shows up at the door and we go to my dining room table and I’m sitting with him, and I tell him like yo I made this jacket. And he makes some joke about, you know “You did look pretty hot. I’m happy to know that you put on all those clothes for me.”

He was leveling. He was leveling the conversation, this is what people do all the time. Like if I meet someone who I respect or I look up to, I will literally like kiss their feet. You know someone that I know that’s put in a lot of work. And it’s a lot of agents, a lot of people who work under the main guy that will level, that will try to level you. You know when they talk to you, they talk down to you. And I’m just sitting like “Whoa, ok.” Obviously I have to show him like hey I’m working on this stuff and it’s coming out good and this is all I have a chance to work on. You know like when I worked with A.P.C. I only had two times to look at the collection, you know I couldn’t really grab it and dig into it the way I dig into like working on “All Of The Lights” or something like that, it’s like, there’s a timeline, a cut-off switch, especially when you’re dealing with apparel and the way that people make apparel currently

Everyone, everyone I talked to would try to level me. You know. And then there was this guy named Hermann Deininger that was the head of Adidas. And I say “was” because he passed away recently. And I showed him what I shot in Qatar, the Cruel Summer film, that was using 7 screens, the surround vision idea which we’ve never shown online because you have to experience it in it’s space. It’s the same thing I showed Disney and Universal, and said you know this is the new frontier on the way we need to see film. And which I got all no’s on that – to date. And this guy Hermann saw it, and he believed. He believed that maybe I had something more than how big my rap record was. In me he could tell, he knew, he’s like this guy has something to say and to give that’s past the current box that he’s put in. And he made sure, Hermann and Jon Wexler made sure that Adidas deal got done. And the deal has nothing to do with the idea of the higher ups in society. The deal is all about the moment when I can bring a shoe to a kid a Foot Locker and get on my knees and take it back to when I worked at The Gap and put the shoes on his feet. That is what the deal is about. The deal is about when the star of a show is a 5 foot 3 girl, when there’s never been a 5 foot 3 girl as the star of any fashion show. The deal is when the kids came to 42 locations across the world to see Yeezy Season 1 x Adidas Originals launch and the excitement that was in that theater, and when they saw that line up, they saw that brigade, they reacted to it when they heard “Wolves," when they saw the boots, when they saw the runners, when they saw the matrix sweaters, when they saw all these things like hitting them back to back to back to back. This is what I fought for. None of this was about me having like a bigger house, a faster Lamborghini. It, like, it wasn't about that. It was about these kids having a moment. To be themselves. To be a stronger version, you know, of themselves. I make this stuff to empower people. I feel like there's so many things that are made to, you know, to wear the people as opposed to people wearing it. And I asked my assistant one time. I was like, "how does these clothes make you feel?" She said, "I feel powerful." And that's our, that's our main goal. As the song says, "no one man should have all that power." No one man should have it. Everyone should have it

Yeah, I was still off, you know what I mean? I might have some things that are off now, but I feel like, in the same way when I came up with "All Falls Down," and I was able to differentiate myself from whoever I was trying to rap like at that point and I found my voice and my message. It's like, I felt like..

 When I wrote "All Falls Down." That's when I was like, "okay, this is who I am in the.. this is what I'm, this is what I'm presenting." So now I feel like.. it's funny, I would always say, you know, "I wanna sculpt with marble." And it wasn't until I was working on Yeezus, and I was learning about furniture and the fact that I am a rich person that afforded me the opportunity to go to French flea markets and the galleries and buy, you know, like furniture that get charged, that rich people get charged a lot for. And one of the things they had was this Le Corbusier lamp, and it was made of cement, and it was this beautiful sculpture that was...it really inspired me because he made it for Zeus, so he made it for everyone. And it was made of cement. So it wasn't the material, it was the idea that was the most important. And I always wanted the resources of LVMH, but it wasn't until I started taking the sensibility of proportion and color and finishing and applying it to fleece and jersey French terry which is a cement in comparison to, you know, the type of materials that Louis Vuitton might use. That I find a message, a voice, a reason, a reason to create. You know, it was a futile argument for me to say, "hey, everyone, get behind me so I can make another $5000 jacket that you can afford." It's like insane. But now I feel people rallying because they know that I wanna fight for H&M, Zara type concept and I know that Adidas can eventually get those price points. And I want to apologize to everyone right now because I believe that Season 1 may still be in that upper price point and there's still the words "exclusivity," you know, being thrown around. "Exclusivity" is the new N-word. Not nigga, "exclusivity." Am I saying the word right?

 Yeah, that is the new N-word. Cause nothing should be exclusive. Everyone should have the opportunity to drink from the same fountain. The idea of exclusivity is a new colored-people fountain concept. And saying, "we're gonna overcharge sneaker culture guys to, you know, drink at the right fountain." You know, we have to reboot our mentality. Period. Of a generation. You know, it wouldn't even matter if I sold one sweatshirt. You know, as long as this interview gets done, and kids hear this and know this and or someone in position of power or someone that will be in a position of power in the future has a chance to make a difference. And they say someone who was at the lowest point grabbing at straws, express themselves freely, and overcame it through all adversary, all adversity, means that they can do the same thing. You know

 And I was, I was using the wrong words. My rap was wrong. You know what I'm saying? I was getting the drinks, you know, thrown in my face as opposed to leaving with the girl at the end of the night. You know, cause imagine, think about the type of shit, wild shit you say in interviews. And imagine if someone said this very thing to a girl at a bar. "Yo, what up, baby? I'm a genius!" They be like, "yo, who's this guy?" "No, I'm telling you, I sold all this, I sold this many shoes." Then she be like, "yo, chill, chill." Like, "gosh, get me out of here already." You know what I'm saying? And that's who I was and that was that frustration I had cause I'm seeing like this.. I'm looking at this girl like, "man, I know that.."

 Yeah, I know, I just don't know how to work it.  And the right way so I'm gonna stumble. I was like the 40 year old virgin of dealing with like corporations and stuff you know.. Yeah. I did not know how to communicate at all. And it's like I had my point, my message was, you know, simply like, "your egg, my semen, we change the world." You know, and I imagine that that's gonna sound wrong.
 I mean, I like saying shit that sounds wrong anyway, you know, because wrong is okay, you know like. We have the right to be wrong sometimes.
 You know, after I did the presentation in New York I was able to get that alien out of my stomach, you know like. I was on a flight back in the morning to go shoot the "Blessings" video with Big Sean and Drake.
 And I couldn't have been happier. To go and shoot this video with two of the hottest rappers in the game. Well, let's be respectful and truthful. The hottest rapper and one of the hottest rappers in the game. And I fall somewhere in that, you know? In that, that field. So..
Just working hard. On it
And it's fun. And it's fun to work hard and we're being inventive and I've still got some, you know, a lot of opinions and perspectives that I think are important and very.. can be inspiring to people. That fight, and you know, The College Dropout came out of a fight to want to rap. And this new album is coming out of a fight of wanting to design. And..
I mean, it's a joyful noise onto the Lord. Like, it is still, you know, the struggle, you know, but the beauty from the struggle. You know
Yea, the song Amazing Grace, you know coming out of the worst pain possible and making the most beautiful song you know, possible. You know I wanna perform “Only One” as many times as possible. You know could be vilified or misunderstood, and like I said I didn’t come here to be liked I came here to make a difference. I’m not talking about this interview, I’m talking about life. Some people’s job they’re very extremely likeable and I think I could figure that out. I think I’m way nicer to people just in general. Everyone I meet I’m extremely nice. But as soon as people start playing games I stop. I stop playing games. And at any moment I can hit that Ye button and we can go right back to day one. People be forgetting though, they be forgetting real quick. But it’s all love, and great energy and positive energy. I like the, I like the differences of views and our approach to music like when I’m sitting making music with Paul McCartney and I come in I have all these lists of complaints like “da-da-da-da-da!” and this happened and that happened and he say “Yo man, it’s all cool though! How bout we make a song?” And we just make song, after song after song after song after song after song
And yea that’s what we did. You know people think that our first two singles don’t have drums but both of those are percussive instruments
She was killing that right?
 I mean I liked, I liked songs like that when I was growing up. And I mean the type of chord changes that Paul does, I don’t need to understand them, and to be able to be involved with that..
 Yea exactly. And be able to be involved with writing a song like that, it’s just like way next to, like meeting Paul McCartney is like meeting Ralph Lauren
 It’s like “whoa!”
The greatest of their field, period. Of all time
Yea the whole cadence was trap. Soon as Paul starts playing, I start singing in trap
Fusion is the future. Period. The mixing of ideas, the mixing of, know the two lunch tables working together, you know. Humanity period man, we’re one people and maybe that’s like incorrect English – I’m sorry mom – but you know I went to Louise Wilson’s memorial, you know the greatest fashion instructor of all time. And I’m talking about of all timers.
Ok so Louise Wilson was the baddest professor of all time of any fashion school, ever. Notorious for not letting people stop at a 7 or a 8, pushing people to a 12. So the first time that I saw one of her students Pheobe Philo's Céline collection, I was looking at a 12. When I saw McQueen’s last show the Atlantis collection, I was looking at a 12. Christopher Kane's Bandage collection I’m looking at a 12. Alber Elbaz I’m looking at a 12. That’s the designer, the designer of Lanvin which completely revolutionized the men’s sneaker, fashion sneaker industry. Last time I saw her we had dinner at Hakkasan which is my favourite restaurant in London and I think she knew that she was gonna pass and she just wanted to give me some words of advice moving forward and she was asking me about my daughter, asking me about my wife. And she said so many students, they don’t give it their all. And the problem is soon as they do anything halfway good, when they’re 2 years old, 3 years old, their parents clap
Exactly, that’s what she said, they clap. And she just looked at me, she said “Kanye, don’t clap.”
 I didn’t know we were gonna lose her. You know I just um, and she told me she said, you know “thank you for the times you know, when we came to performances” and “this has like really meant a lot to me.” You know she would—
Johnny Ive who is like, in my opinion from what I know, Elon Musk included, is like the world’s greatest living designer and has the best mentality behind design. And I said from what I know because there might be other, there might be some others, there are a lot that are great but Johnny Ive's the best that I know. He said that people are so concerned at being first as opposed to being better so I think that, I think innovation almost gets too much credit, in a way. So, if we talk about this type of company, it wouldn’t be a company of innovation because as Steve Stoute told me driving down the westside highway “there’s no money in the innovation.”
And making something of better quality for more people. So it has to be a balance of both. I’ve said this a few times but I wanna just say it right here for people who haven’t read it or seen but I think people think that I pander to fashion particularly. You know because, people say “why fashion?” It’s not politics, world war it’s not that, it’s fashion, it’s just a jacket or something, it’s just a dress. But I believe that the world can only be saved through design. And I think that the fashion world has.. and when I say through design, I know it’s some snarky classist editor that’s gonna take that and say “Kanye West said that the world will be saved with a couture dress.” That’s not what I’m saying. The mentality behind design, you know art is to be free. Design is to fix
No politics, just truth. Does it fucking work or not. Irrigation, you know, that’s a form of design
That’s exactly what we talk about. What does Kanye West and Elon Musk talk about? The fut’
So when I put out things that if I say hey, I want to work with Miucca Prada one day on highschool uniforms or something, I just put it out, you know. We just put it out there. Or as I told Obama last time I saw him, hey, I want, I would suggest that you sit with Elon Musk. I would suggest that both you guys go to China. I would suggest this. The, I think it may happen
I got scared of the idea you know someone call you crazy so many times you start to believe it. And I almost got scared of the idea of like going crazy in some way but I wasn’t going crazy, I was like the only person that wasn’t crazy. You know what I’m saying like, I just stand there and I just look like “is anyone else here seeing what I’m seeing? None of you guys are seeing what I’m seeing” or it’s just like your Maybach and your house is like that important that you won’t move at all
That you won’t say anything at all in risk of losing something. You won’t say anything on anyone’s behalf at this point? You know so, if you have that ability to do that, to see that, you know that Walt Disney ability in some way, you have to apply it. You have to use it. You can’t be psyched out. You know, everyone’s on our side. I was just in my own way, but everyone’s on our side and everything that I ever said will happen, will happen. Just as much as you guys saw that Adidas Original Yeezys Season 1 presentation streamed to 42 locations and you saw that front row. The juxtaposition of the people in the front and second rows to where the people standing in the show had come from is the fusion and is the future. It is the glass shattering of the class system, which is the new racism. Class is the new way to discriminate against people, to hold people down, to hold people in a place based on where their kids go to school, how much money they make, what they drive, where they live and what type of clothes they have and how much, you know, how much they have in their account for their retirement. To somehow say that this person right here means more than this person. Like I know I tweeted Black Lives Matter but all lives matter. Like, my doorman is more important to me than any head of any company. He keeps us safe. My driver, keeps us safe and goes to work every day. The guy painting the windows at the house when we changed them from white to chocolate brown, you know what the architect suggested, he is just as important as anyone else that walks in that house and grabs a glass of champagne. It’s no more of this separation of what you came from, your race, financial background, education, talent level, beauty. Whatever it is that people use to separate people
And I’m not saying I have answers, I’m just saying these are my current opinions. As I gave my current opinions a year ago, this is my current opinions now
I think yea I misconstrued it but I think that everybody has a right to an opinion, everyone has a right to be wrong. You know, there could be a lot of people who feel Marshawn Lynch shoulda been handed the ball. But there’s a bunch of Patriots fans that are happy he didn’t get the ball. And everyone has a right to their opinion. You know, and I expressed my opinion, and I’ll take the weight of it
Naw you know as I said on the Charlamagne interview when I was ironically having dinner with Taylor Swift, the Beck song starts playing and I was like “this is really good… maybe I might’ve been wrong!” You know like, and uh..
And I hadn’t been in like 6 years. And the Grammy’s are definitely like an ex-girlfriend. Soon as you get in a car with them, you wanna go right back home
only one thing I want to say, people say I’m a hypocrite right?
Yes, I am. 100%. I’m a human being. I’m super hypocritical. I can feel something one time and completely a different way another time. I do it in the design office. I do it in the studio. I’m super hypo- I really love this, I do it when I get dressed. “I love this” (tsk, tsk) “I hate this!”
Oh, I’m practicing really hard. I try as many times a day as I can. Nori this one is for you! You need a sibling!
Yea, and I been doing a few performances since doing the SNL performance, did a couple performances out here and of course gonna do the Brits. I’ve been really liking these performances. I feel like these are like the performance version of that you know Drake, you know of the 6 God album, of the you know If you’re Reading This It’s Too Late. I feel like I’m a visual extension of what he’s doing like sonically
I mean yea, that element is great. There’s a lot of people that can’t rap that can do that. But the main thing is that fact that he’s delivering you know a level of product – as I said last interview, I’m a product guy – and he’s delivering a level of product to humanity that is of high quality. It works. 80% of the time works all the time!
Haha, but it works. It works. You know what I’m saying. And you have to.. it works. That’s it. And I was just thinking like, I don’t have any advice for this young man, but what I can say is run. Fly. Go as fast as you can. Don’t stop. And you know any time I can be of any service, advice, you know a beat, verse, you know whatever you need. You need some confidential design advice with the shoes you doing over at the other company, I’m not supposed to say that! You know anything that we can collectively do to deliver more awesomeness to the world as a team. You know, not just me and him. Us all